“Let me live out my years in heat of blood!
    Let me lie drunken with the dreamer’s wine!
Let me not see this soul-house built of mud
    Go toppling to the dust a vacant shrine!”




CHAPTER I.


The one opened the door with a latch-key and went in, followed by a
young fellow who awkwardly removed his cap. He wore rough clothes that
smacked of the sea, and he was manifestly out of place in the spacious
hall in which he found himself. He did not know what to do with his
cap, and was stuffing it into his coat pocket when the other took it
from him. The act was done quietly and naturally, and the awkward young
fellow appreciated it. “He understands,” was his thought. “He’ll see me
through all right.”

He walked at the other’s heels with a swing to his shoulders, and his
legs spread unwittingly, as if the level floors were tilting up and
sinking down to the heave and lunge of the sea. The wide rooms seemed
too narrow for his rolling gait, and to himself he was in terror lest
his broad shoulders should collide with the doorways or sweep the
bric-a-brac from the low mantel. He recoiled from side to side between
the various objects and multiplied the hazards that in reality lodged
only in his mind. Between a grand piano and a centre-table piled high
with books was space for a half a dozen to walk abreast, yet he essayed
it with trepidation. His heavy arms hung loosely at his sides. He did
not know what to do with those arms and hands, and when, to his excited
vision, one arm seemed liable to brush against the books on the table,
he lurched away like a frightened horse, barely missing the piano
stool. He watched the easy walk of the other in front of him, and for
the first time realized that his walk was different from that of other
men. He experienced a momentary pang of shame that he should walk so
uncouthly. The sweat burst through the skin of his forehead in tiny
beads, and he paused and mopped his bronzed face with his handkerchief.

“Hold on, Arthur, my boy,” he said, attempting to mask his anxiety with
facetious utterance. “This is too much all at once for yours truly.
Give me a chance to get my nerve. You know I didn’t want to come, an’ I
guess your fam’ly ain’t hankerin’ to see me neither.”

“That’s all right,” was the reassuring answer. “You mustn’t be
frightened at us. We’re just homely people—Hello, there’s a letter for
me.”

He stepped back to the table, tore open the envelope, and began to
read, giving the stranger an opportunity to recover himself. And the
stranger understood and appreciated. His was the gift of sympathy,
understanding; and beneath his alarmed exterior that sympathetic
process went on. He mopped his forehead dry and glanced about him with
a controlled face, though in the eyes there was an expression such as
wild animals betray when they fear the trap. He was surrounded by the
unknown, apprehensive of what might happen, ignorant of what he should
do, aware that he walked and bore himself awkwardly, fearful that every
attribute and power of him was similarly afflicted. He was keenly
sensitive, hopelessly self-conscious, and the amused glance that the
other stole privily at him over the top of the letter burned into him
like a dagger-thrust. He saw the glance, but he gave no sign, for among
the things he had learned was discipline. Also, that dagger-thrust went
to his pride. He cursed himself for having come, and at the same time
resolved that, happen what would, having come, he would carry it
through. The lines of his face hardened, and into his eyes came a
fighting light. He looked about more unconcernedly, sharply observant,
every detail of the pretty interior registering itself on his brain.
His eyes were wide apart; nothing in their field of vision escaped; and
as they drank in the beauty before them the fighting light died out and
a warm glow took its place. He was responsive to beauty, and here was
cause to respond.

An oil painting caught and held him. A heavy surf thundered and burst
over an outjutting rock; lowering storm-clouds covered the sky; and,
outside the line of surf, a pilot-schooner, close-hauled, heeled over
till every detail of her deck was visible, was surging along against a
stormy sunset sky. There was beauty, and it drew him irresistibly. He
forgot his awkward walk and came closer to the painting, very close.
The beauty faded out of the canvas. His face expressed his
bepuzzlement. He stared at what seemed a careless daub of paint, then
stepped away. Immediately all the beauty flashed back into the canvas.
“A trick picture,” was his thought, as he dismissed it, though in the
midst of the multitudinous impressions he was receiving he found time
to feel a prod of indignation that so much beauty should be sacrificed
to make a trick. He did not know painting. He had been brought up on
chromos and lithographs that were always definite and sharp, near or
far. He had seen oil paintings, it was true, in the show windows of
shops, but the glass of the windows had prevented his eager eyes from
approaching too near.

He glanced around at his friend reading the letter and saw the books on
the table. Into his eyes leaped a wistfulness and a yearning as
promptly as the yearning leaps into the eyes of a starving man at sight
of food. An impulsive stride, with one lurch to right and left of the
shoulders, brought him to the table, where he began affectionately
handling the books. He glanced at the titles and the authors’ names,
read fragments of text, caressing the volumes with his eyes and hands,
and, once, recognized a book he had read. For the rest, they were
strange books and strange authors. He chanced upon a volume of
Swinburne and began reading steadily, forgetful of where he was, his
face glowing. Twice he closed the book on his forefinger to look at the
name of the author. Swinburne! he would remember that name. That fellow
had eyes, and he had certainly seen color and flashing light. But who
was Swinburne? Was he dead a hundred years or so, like most of the
poets? Or was he alive still, and writing? He turned to the title-page
. . . yes, he had written other books; well, he would go to the free
library the first thing in the morning and try to get hold of some of
Swinburne’s stuff. He went back to the text and lost himself. He did
not notice that a young woman had entered the room. The first he knew
was when he heard Arthur’s voice saying:-

“Ruth, this is Mr. Eden.”

The book was closed on his forefinger, and before he turned he was
thrilling to the first new impression, which was not of the girl, but
of her brother’s words. Under that muscled body of his he was a mass of
quivering sensibilities. At the slightest impact of the outside world
upon his consciousness, his thoughts, sympathies, and emotions leapt
and played like lambent flame. He was extraordinarily receptive and
responsive, while his imagination, pitched high, was ever at work
establishing relations of likeness and difference. “Mr. Eden,” was what
he had thrilled to—he who had been called “Eden,” or “Martin Eden,” or
just “Martin,” all his life. And “_Mister_!” It was certainly going
some, was his internal comment. His mind seemed to turn, on the
instant, into a vast camera obscura, and he saw arrayed around his
consciousness endless pictures from his life, of stoke-holes and
forecastles, camps and beaches, jails and boozing-kens, fever-hospitals
and slum streets, wherein the thread of association was the fashion in
which he had been addressed in those various situations.

And then he turned and saw the girl. The phantasmagoria of his brain
vanished at sight of her. She was a pale, ethereal creature, with wide,
spiritual blue eyes and a wealth of golden hair. He did not know how
she was dressed, except that the dress was as wonderful as she. He
likened her to a pale gold flower upon a slender stem. No, she was a
spirit, a divinity, a goddess; such sublimated beauty was not of the
earth. Or perhaps the books were right, and there were many such as she
in the upper walks of life. She might well be sung by that chap,
Swinburne. Perhaps he had had somebody like her in mind when he painted
that girl, Iseult, in the book there on the table. All this plethora of
sight, and feeling, and thought occurred on the instant. There was no
pause of the realities wherein he moved. He saw her hand coming out to
his, and she looked him straight in the eyes as she shook hands,
frankly, like a man. The women he had known did not shake hands that
way. For that matter, most of them did not shake hands at all. A flood
of associations, visions of various ways he had made the acquaintance
of women, rushed into his mind and threatened to swamp it. But he shook
them aside and looked at her. Never had he seen such a woman. The women
he had known! Immediately, beside her, on either hand, ranged the women
he had known. For an eternal second he stood in the midst of a portrait
gallery, wherein she occupied the central place, while about her were
limned many women, all to be weighed and measured by a fleeting glance,
herself the unit of weight and measure. He saw the weak and sickly
faces of the girls of the factories, and the simpering, boisterous
girls from the south of Market. There were women of the cattle camps,
and swarthy cigarette-smoking women of Old Mexico. These, in turn, were
crowded out by Japanese women, doll-like, stepping mincingly on wooden
clogs; by Eurasians, delicate featured, stamped with degeneracy; by
full-bodied South-Sea-Island women, flower-crowned and brown-skinned.
All these were blotted out by a grotesque and terrible nightmare
brood—frowsy, shuffling creatures from the pavements of Whitechapel,
gin-bloated hags of the stews, and all the vast hell’s following of
harpies, vile-mouthed and filthy, that under the guise of monstrous
female form prey upon sailors, the scrapings of the ports, the scum and
slime of the human pit.

“Won’t you sit down, Mr. Eden?” the girl was saying. “I have been
looking forward to meeting you ever since Arthur told us. It was brave
of you—”

He waved his hand deprecatingly and muttered that it was nothing at
all, what he had done, and that any fellow would have done it. She
noticed that the hand he waved was covered with fresh abrasions, in the
process of healing, and a glance at the other loose-hanging hand showed
it to be in the same condition. Also, with quick, critical eye, she
noted a scar on his cheek, another that peeped out from under the hair
of the forehead, and a third that ran down and disappeared under the
starched collar. She repressed a smile at sight of the red line that
marked the chafe of the collar against the bronzed neck. He was
evidently unused to stiff collars. Likewise her feminine eye took in
the clothes he wore, the cheap and unaesthetic cut, the wrinkling of
the coat across the shoulders, and the series of wrinkles in the
sleeves that advertised bulging biceps muscles.

While he waved his hand and muttered that he had done nothing at all,
he was obeying her behest by trying to get into a chair. He found time
to admire the ease with which she sat down, then lurched toward a chair
facing her, overwhelmed with consciousness of the awkward figure he was
cutting. This was a new experience for him. All his life, up to then,
he had been unaware of being either graceful or awkward. Such thoughts
of self had never entered his mind. He sat down gingerly on the edge of
the chair, greatly worried by his hands. They were in the way wherever
he put them. Arthur was leaving the room, and Martin Eden followed his
exit with longing eyes. He felt lost, alone there in the room with that
pale spirit of a woman. There was no bar-keeper upon whom to call for
drinks, no small boy to send around the corner for a can of beer and by
means of that social fluid start the amenities of friendship flowing.

“You have such a scar on your neck, Mr. Eden,” the girl was saying.
“How did it happen? I am sure it must have been some adventure.”

“A Mexican with a knife, miss,” he answered, moistening his parched
lips and clearing his throat. “It was just a fight. After I got the
knife away, he tried to bite off my nose.”

Baldly as he had stated it, in his eyes was a rich vision of that hot,
starry night at Salina Cruz, the white strip of beach, the lights of
the sugar steamers in the harbor, the voices of the drunken sailors in
the distance, the jostling stevedores, the flaming passion in the
Mexican’s face, the glint of the beast-eyes in the starlight, the sting
of the steel in his neck, and the rush of blood, the crowd and the
cries, the two bodies, his and the Mexican’s, locked together, rolling
over and over and tearing up the sand, and from away off somewhere the
mellow tinkling of a guitar. Such was the picture, and he thrilled to
the memory of it, wondering if the man could paint it who had painted
the pilot-schooner on the wall. The white beach, the stars, and the
lights of the sugar steamers would look great, he thought, and midway
on the sand the dark group of figures that surrounded the fighters. The
knife occupied a place in the picture, he decided, and would show well,
with a sort of gleam, in the light of the stars. But of all this no
hint had crept into his speech. “He tried to bite off my nose,” he
concluded.

“Oh,” the girl said, in a faint, far voice, and he noticed the shock in
her sensitive face.

He felt a shock himself, and a blush of embarrassment shone faintly on
his sunburned cheeks, though to him it burned as hotly as when his
cheeks had been exposed to the open furnace-door in the fire-room. Such
sordid things as stabbing affrays were evidently not fit subjects for
conversation with a lady. People in the books, in her walk of life, did
not talk about such things—perhaps they did not know about them,
either.

There was a brief pause in the conversation they were trying to get
started. Then she asked tentatively about the scar on his cheek. Even
as she asked, he realized that she was making an effort to talk his
talk, and he resolved to get away from it and talk hers.

“It was just an accident,” he said, putting his hand to his cheek. “One
night, in a calm, with a heavy sea running, the main-boom-lift carried
away, an’ next the tackle. The lift was wire, an’ it was threshin’
around like a snake. The whole watch was tryin’ to grab it, an’ I
rushed in an’ got swatted.”

“Oh,” she said, this time with an accent of comprehension, though
secretly his speech had been so much Greek to her and she was wondering
what a _lift_ was and what _swatted_ meant.

“This man Swineburne,” he began, attempting to put his plan into
execution and pronouncing the _i_ long.

“Who?”

“Swineburne,” he repeated, with the same mispronunciation. “The poet.”

“Swinburne,” she corrected.

“Yes, that’s the chap,” he stammered, his cheeks hot again. “How long
since he died?”

“Why, I haven’t heard that he was dead.” She looked at him curiously.
“Where did you make his acquaintance?”

“I never clapped eyes on him,” was the reply. “But I read some of his
poetry out of that book there on the table just before you come in. How
do you like his poetry?”

And thereat she began to talk quickly and easily upon the subject he
had suggested. He felt better, and settled back slightly from the edge
of the chair, holding tightly to its arms with his hands, as if it
might get away from him and buck him to the floor. He had succeeded in
making her talk her talk, and while she rattled on, he strove to follow
her, marvelling at all the knowledge that was stowed away in that
pretty head of hers, and drinking in the pale beauty of her face.
Follow her he did, though bothered by unfamiliar words that fell glibly
from her lips and by critical phrases and thought-processes that were
foreign to his mind, but that nevertheless stimulated his mind and set
it tingling. Here was intellectual life, he thought, and here was
beauty, warm and wonderful as he had never dreamed it could be. He
forgot himself and stared at her with hungry eyes. Here was something
to live for, to win to, to fight for—ay, and die for. The books were
true. There were such women in the world. She was one of them. She lent
wings to his imagination, and great, luminous canvases spread
themselves before him whereon loomed vague, gigantic figures of love
and romance, and of heroic deeds for woman’s sake—for a pale woman, a
flower of gold. And through the swaying, palpitant vision, as through a
fairy mirage, he stared at the real woman, sitting there and talking of
literature and art. He listened as well, but he stared, unconscious of
the fixity of his gaze or of the fact that all that was essentially
masculine in his nature was shining in his eyes. But she, who knew
little of the world of men, being a woman, was keenly aware of his
burning eyes. She had never had men look at her in such fashion, and it
embarrassed her. She stumbled and halted in her utterance. The thread
of argument slipped from her. He frightened her, and at the same time
it was strangely pleasant to be so looked upon. Her training warned her
of peril and of wrong, subtle, mysterious, luring; while her instincts
rang clarion-voiced through her being, impelling her to hurdle caste
and place and gain to this traveller from another world, to this
uncouth young fellow with lacerated hands and a line of raw red caused
by the unaccustomed linen at his throat, who, all too evidently, was
soiled and tainted by ungracious existence. She was clean, and her
cleanness revolted; but she was woman, and she was just beginning to
learn the paradox of woman.

“As I was saying—what was I saying?” She broke off abruptly and laughed
merrily at her predicament.

“You was saying that this man Swinburne failed bein’ a great poet
because—an’ that was as far as you got, miss,” he prompted, while to
himself he seemed suddenly hungry, and delicious little thrills crawled
up and down his spine at the sound of her laughter. Like silver, he
thought to himself, like tinkling silver bells; and on the instant, and
for an instant, he was transported to a far land, where under pink
cherry blossoms, he smoked a cigarette and listened to the bells of the
peaked pagoda calling straw-sandalled devotees to worship.

“Yes, thank you,” she said. “Swinburne fails, when all is said, because
he is, well, indelicate. There are many of his poems that should never
be read. Every line of the really great poets is filled with beautiful
truth, and calls to all that is high and noble in the human. Not a line
of the great poets can be spared without impoverishing the world by
that much.”

“I thought it was great,” he said hesitatingly, “the little I read. I
had no idea he was such a—a scoundrel. I guess that crops out in his
other books.”

“There are many lines that could be spared from the book you were
reading,” she said, her voice primly firm and dogmatic.

“I must ’a’ missed ’em,” he announced. “What I read was the real goods.
It was all lighted up an’ shining, an’ it shun right into me an’
lighted me up inside, like the sun or a searchlight. That’s the way it
landed on me, but I guess I ain’t up much on poetry, miss.”

He broke off lamely. He was confused, painfully conscious of his
inarticulateness. He had felt the bigness and glow of life in what he
had read, but his speech was inadequate. He could not express what he
felt, and to himself he likened himself to a sailor, in a strange ship,
on a dark night, groping about in the unfamiliar running rigging. Well,
he decided, it was up to him to get acquainted in this new world. He
had never seen anything that he couldn’t get the hang of when he wanted
to and it was about time for him to want to learn to talk the things
that were inside of him so that she could understand. _She_ was bulking
large on his horizon.

“Now Longfellow—” she was saying.

“Yes, I’ve read ’m,” he broke in impulsively, spurred on to exhibit and
make the most of his little store of book knowledge, desirous of
showing her that he was not wholly a stupid clod. “‘The Psalm of Life,’
‘Excelsior,’ an’ . . . I guess that’s all.”

She nodded her head and smiled, and he felt, somehow, that her smile
was tolerant, pitifully tolerant. He was a fool to attempt to make a
pretence that way. That Longfellow chap most likely had written
countless books of poetry.

“Excuse me, miss, for buttin’ in that way. I guess the real facts is
that I don’t know nothin’ much about such things. It ain’t in my class.
But I’m goin’ to make it in my class.”

It sounded like a threat. His voice was determined, his eyes were
flashing, the lines of his face had grown harsh. And to her it seemed
that the angle of his jaw had changed; its pitch had become
unpleasantly aggressive. At the same time a wave of intense virility
seemed to surge out from him and impinge upon her.

“I think you could make it in—in your class,” she finished with a
laugh. “You are very strong.”

Her gaze rested for a moment on the muscular neck, heavy corded, almost
bull-like, bronzed by the sun, spilling over with rugged health and
strength. And though he sat there, blushing and humble, again she felt
drawn to him. She was surprised by a wanton thought that rushed into
her mind. It seemed to her that if she could lay her two hands upon
that neck that all its strength and vigor would flow out to her. She
was shocked by this thought. It seemed to reveal to her an undreamed
depravity in her nature. Besides, strength to her was a gross and
brutish thing. Her ideal of masculine beauty had always been slender
gracefulness. Yet the thought still persisted. It bewildered her that
she should desire to place her hands on that sunburned neck. In truth,
she was far from robust, and the need of her body and mind was for
strength. But she did not know it. She knew only that no man had ever
affected her before as this one had, who shocked her from moment to
moment with his awful grammar.

“Yes, I ain’t no invalid,” he said. “When it comes down to hard-pan, I
can digest scrap-iron. But just now I’ve got dyspepsia. Most of what
you was sayin’ I can’t digest. Never trained that way, you see. I like
books and poetry, and what time I’ve had I’ve read ’em, but I’ve never
thought about ’em the way you have. That’s why I can’t talk about ’em.
I’m like a navigator adrift on a strange sea without chart or compass.
Now I want to get my bearin’s. Mebbe you can put me right. How did you
learn all this you’ve ben talkin’?”

“By going to school, I fancy, and by studying,” she answered.

“I went to school when I was a kid,” he began to object.

“Yes; but I mean high school, and lectures, and the university.”

“You’ve gone to the university?” he demanded in frank amazement. He
felt that she had become remoter from him by at least a million miles.

“I’m going there now. I’m taking special courses in English.”

He did not know what “English” meant, but he made a mental note of that
item of ignorance and passed on.

“How long would I have to study before I could go to the university?”
he asked.

She beamed encouragement upon his desire for knowledge, and said: “That
depends upon how much studying you have already done. You have never
attended high school? Of course not. But did you finish grammar
school?”

“I had two years to run, when I left,” he answered. “But I was always
honorably promoted at school.”

The next moment, angry with himself for the boast, he had gripped the
arms of the chair so savagely that every finger-end was stinging. At
the same moment he became aware that a woman was entering the room. He
saw the girl leave her chair and trip swiftly across the floor to the
newcomer. They kissed each other, and, with arms around each other’s
waists, they advanced toward him. That must be her mother, he thought.
She was a tall, blond woman, slender, and stately, and beautiful. Her
gown was what he might expect in such a house. His eyes delighted in
the graceful lines of it. She and her dress together reminded him of
women on the stage. Then he remembered seeing similar grand ladies and
gowns entering the London theatres while he stood and watched and the
policemen shoved him back into the drizzle beyond the awning. Next his
mind leaped to the Grand Hotel at Yokohama, where, too, from the
sidewalk, he had seen grand ladies. Then the city and the harbor of
Yokohama, in a thousand pictures, began flashing before his eyes. But
he swiftly dismissed the kaleidoscope of memory, oppressed by the
urgent need of the present. He knew that he must stand up to be
introduced, and he struggled painfully to his feet, where he stood with
trousers bagging at the knees, his arms loose-hanging and ludicrous,
his face set hard for the impending ordeal.




CHAPTER II.


The process of getting into the dining room was a nightmare to him.
Between halts and stumbles, jerks and lurches, locomotion had at times
seemed impossible. But at last he had made it, and was seated alongside
of Her. The array of knives and forks frightened him. They bristled
with unknown perils, and he gazed at them, fascinated, till their
dazzle became a background across which moved a succession of
forecastle pictures, wherein he and his mates sat eating salt beef with
sheath-knives and fingers, or scooping thick pea-soup out of pannikins
by means of battered iron spoons. The stench of bad beef was in his
nostrils, while in his ears, to the accompaniment of creaking timbers
and groaning bulkheads, echoed the loud mouth-noises of the eaters. He
watched them eating, and decided that they ate like pigs. Well, he
would be careful here. He would make no noise. He would keep his mind
upon it all the time.

He glanced around the table. Opposite him was Arthur, and Arthur’s
brother, Norman. They were her brothers, he reminded himself, and his
heart warmed toward them. How they loved each other, the members of
this family! There flashed into his mind the picture of her mother, of
the kiss of greeting, and of the pair of them walking toward him with
arms entwined. Not in his world were such displays of affection between
parents and children made. It was a revelation of the heights of
existence that were attained in the world above. It was the finest
thing yet that he had seen in this small glimpse of that world. He was
moved deeply by appreciation of it, and his heart was melting with
sympathetic tenderness. He had starved for love all his life. His
nature craved love. It was an organic demand of his being. Yet he had
gone without, and hardened himself in the process. He had not known
that he needed love. Nor did he know it now. He merely saw it in
operation, and thrilled to it, and thought it fine, and high, and
splendid.

He was glad that Mr. Morse was not there. It was difficult enough
getting acquainted with her, and her mother, and her brother, Norman.
Arthur he already knew somewhat. The father would have been too much
for him, he felt sure. It seemed to him that he had never worked so
hard in his life. The severest toil was child’s play compared with
this. Tiny nodules of moisture stood out on his forehead, and his shirt
was wet with sweat from the exertion of doing so many unaccustomed
things at once. He had to eat as he had never eaten before, to handle
strange tools, to glance surreptitiously about and learn how to
accomplish each new thing, to receive the flood of impressions that was
pouring in upon him and being mentally annotated and classified; to be
conscious of a yearning for her that perturbed him in the form of a
dull, aching restlessness; to feel the prod of desire to win to the
walk in life whereon she trod, and to have his mind ever and again
straying off in speculation and vague plans of how to reach to her.
Also, when his secret glance went across to Norman opposite him, or to
any one else, to ascertain just what knife or fork was to be used in
any particular occasion, that person’s features were seized upon by his
mind, which automatically strove to appraise them and to divine what
they were—all in relation to her. Then he had to talk, to hear what was
said to him and what was said back and forth, and to answer, when it
was necessary, with a tongue prone to looseness of speech that required
a constant curb. And to add confusion to confusion, there was the
servant, an unceasing menace, that appeared noiselessly at his
shoulder, a dire Sphinx that propounded puzzles and conundrums
demanding instantaneous solution. He was oppressed throughout the meal
by the thought of finger-bowls. Irrelevantly, insistently, scores of
times, he wondered when they would come on and what they looked like.
He had heard of such things, and now, sooner or later, somewhere in the
next few minutes, he would see them, sit at table with exalted beings
who used them—ay, and he would use them himself. And most important of
all, far down and yet always at the surface of his thought, was the
problem of how he should comport himself toward these persons. What
should his attitude be? He wrestled continually and anxiously with the
problem. There were cowardly suggestions that he should make believe,
assume a part; and there were still more cowardly suggestions that
warned him he would fail in such course, that his nature was not fitted
to live up to it, and that he would make a fool of himself.

It was during the first part of the dinner, struggling to decide upon
his attitude, that he was very quiet. He did not know that his
quietness was giving the lie to Arthur’s words of the day before, when
that brother of hers had announced that he was going to bring a wild
man home to dinner and for them not to be alarmed, because they would
find him an interesting wild man. Martin Eden could not have found it
in him, just then, to believe that her brother could be guilty of such
treachery—especially when he had been the means of getting this
particular brother out of an unpleasant row. So he sat at table,
perturbed by his own unfitness and at the same time charmed by all that
went on about him. For the first time he realized that eating was
something more than a utilitarian function. He was unaware of what he
ate. It was merely food. He was feasting his love of beauty at this
table where eating was an aesthetic function. It was an intellectual
function, too. His mind was stirred. He heard words spoken that were
meaningless to him, and other words that he had seen only in books and
that no man or woman he had known was of large enough mental caliber to
pronounce. When he heard such words dropping carelessly from the lips
of the members of this marvellous family, her family, he thrilled with
delight. The romance, and beauty, and high vigor of the books were
coming true. He was in that rare and blissful state wherein a man sees
his dreams stalk out from the crannies of fantasy and become fact.

Never had he been at such an altitude of living, and he kept himself in
the background, listening, observing, and pleasuring, replying in
reticent monosyllables, saying, “Yes, miss,” and “No, miss,” to her,
and “Yes, ma’am,” and “No, ma’am,” to her mother. He curbed the
impulse, arising out of his sea-training, to say “Yes, sir,” and “No,
sir,” to her brothers. He felt that it would be inappropriate and a
confession of inferiority on his part—which would never do if he was to
win to her. Also, it was a dictate of his pride. “By God!” he cried to
himself, once; “I’m just as good as them, and if they do know lots that
I don’t, I could learn ’m a few myself, all the same!” And the next
moment, when she or her mother addressed him as “Mr. Eden,” his
aggressive pride was forgotten, and he was glowing and warm with
delight. He was a civilized man, that was what he was, shoulder to
shoulder, at dinner, with people he had read about in books. He was in
the books himself, adventuring through the printed pages of bound
volumes.

But while he belied Arthur’s description, and appeared a gentle lamb
rather than a wild man, he was racking his brains for a course of
action. He was no gentle lamb, and the part of second fiddle would
never do for the high-pitched dominance of his nature. He talked only
when he had to, and then his speech was like his walk to the table,
filled with jerks and halts as he groped in his polyglot vocabulary for
words, debating over words he knew were fit but which he feared he
could not pronounce, rejecting other words he knew would not be
understood or would be raw and harsh. But all the time he was oppressed
by the consciousness that this carefulness of diction was making a
booby of him, preventing him from expressing what he had in him. Also,
his love of freedom chafed against the restriction in much the same way
his neck chafed against the starched fetter of a collar. Besides, he
was confident that he could not keep it up. He was by nature powerful
of thought and sensibility, and the creative spirit was restive and
urgent. He was swiftly mastered by the concept or sensation in him that
struggled in birth-throes to receive expression and form, and then he
forgot himself and where he was, and the old words—the tools of speech
he knew—slipped out.

Once, he declined something from the servant who interrupted and
pestered at his shoulder, and he said, shortly and emphatically, “Pow!”

On the instant those at the table were keyed up and expectant, the
servant was smugly pleased, and he was wallowing in mortification. But
he recovered himself quickly.

“It’s the Kanaka for ‘finish,’” he explained, “and it just come out
naturally. It’s spelt p-a-u.”

He caught her curious and speculative eyes fixed on his hands, and,
being in explanatory mood, he said:-

“I just come down the Coast on one of the Pacific mail steamers. She
was behind time, an’ around the Puget Sound ports we worked like
niggers, storing cargo—mixed freight, if you know what that means.
That’s how the skin got knocked off.”

“Oh, it wasn’t that,” she hastened to explain, in turn. “Your hands
seemed too small for your body.”

His cheeks were hot. He took it as an exposure of another of his
deficiencies.

“Yes,” he said depreciatingly. “They ain’t big enough to stand the
strain. I can hit like a mule with my arms and shoulders. They are too
strong, an’ when I smash a man on the jaw the hands get smashed, too.”

He was not happy at what he had said. He was filled with disgust at
himself. He had loosed the guard upon his tongue and talked about
things that were not nice.

“It was brave of you to help Arthur the way you did—and you a
stranger,” she said tactfully, aware of his discomfiture though not of
the reason for it.

He, in turn, realized what she had done, and in the consequent warm
surge of gratefulness that overwhelmed him forgot his loose-worded
tongue.

“It wasn’t nothin’ at all,” he said. “Any guy ’ud do it for another.
That bunch of hoodlums was lookin’ for trouble, an’ Arthur wasn’t
botherin’ ’em none. They butted in on ’m, an’ then I butted in on them
an’ poked a few. That’s where some of the skin off my hands went, along
with some of the teeth of the gang. I wouldn’t ’a’ missed it for
anything. When I seen—”

He paused, open-mouthed, on the verge of the pit of his own depravity
and utter worthlessness to breathe the same air she did. And while
Arthur took up the tale, for the twentieth time, of his adventure with
the drunken hoodlums on the ferry-boat and of how Martin Eden had
rushed in and rescued him, that individual, with frowning brows,
meditated upon the fool he had made of himself, and wrestled more
determinedly with the problem of how he should conduct himself toward
these people. He certainly had not succeeded so far. He wasn’t of their
tribe, and he couldn’t talk their lingo, was the way he put it to
himself. He couldn’t fake being their kind. The masquerade would fail,
and besides, masquerade was foreign to his nature. There was no room in
him for sham or artifice. Whatever happened, he must be real. He
couldn’t talk their talk just yet, though in time he would. Upon that
he was resolved. But in the meantime, talk he must, and it must be his
own talk, toned down, of course, so as to be comprehensible to them and
so as not to shock them too much. And furthermore, he wouldn’t claim,
not even by tacit acceptance, to be familiar with anything that was
unfamiliar. In pursuance of this decision, when the two brothers,
talking university shop, had used “trig” several times, Martin Eden
demanded:-

“What is _trig_?”

“Trignometry,” Norman said; “a higher form of math.”

“And what is math?” was the next question, which, somehow, brought the
laugh on Norman.

“Mathematics, arithmetic,” was the answer.

Martin Eden nodded. He had caught a glimpse of the apparently
illimitable vistas of knowledge. What he saw took on tangibility. His
abnormal power of vision made abstractions take on concrete form. In
the alchemy of his brain, trigonometry and mathematics and the whole
field of knowledge which they betokened were transmuted into so much
landscape. The vistas he saw were vistas of green foliage and forest
glades, all softly luminous or shot through with flashing lights. In
the distance, detail was veiled and blurred by a purple haze, but
behind this purple haze, he knew, was the glamour of the unknown, the
lure of romance. It was like wine to him. Here was adventure, something
to do with head and hand, a world to conquer—and straightway from the
back of his consciousness rushed the thought, _conquering, to win to
her, that lily-pale spirit sitting beside him_.

The glimmering vision was rent asunder and dissipated by Arthur, who,
all evening, had been trying to draw his wild man out. Martin Eden
remembered his decision. For the first time he became himself,
consciously and deliberately at first, but soon lost in the joy of
creating in making life as he knew it appear before his listeners’
eyes. He had been a member of the crew of the smuggling schooner
_Halcyon_ when she was captured by a revenue cutter. He saw with wide
eyes, and he could tell what he saw. He brought the pulsing sea before
them, and the men and the ships upon the sea. He communicated his power
of vision, till they saw with his eyes what he had seen. He selected
from the vast mass of detail with an artist’s touch, drawing pictures
of life that glowed and burned with light and color, injecting movement
so that his listeners surged along with him on the flood of rough
eloquence, enthusiasm, and power. At times he shocked them with the
vividness of the narrative and his terms of speech, but beauty always
followed fast upon the heels of violence, and tragedy was relieved by
humor, by interpretations of the strange twists and quirks of sailors’
minds.

And while he talked, the girl looked at him with startled eyes. His
fire warmed her. She wondered if she had been cold all her days. She
wanted to lean toward this burning, blazing man that was like a volcano
spouting forth strength, robustness, and health. She felt that she must
lean toward him, and resisted by an effort. Then, too, there was the
counter impulse to shrink away from him. She was repelled by those
lacerated hands, grimed by toil so that the very dirt of life was
ingrained in the flesh itself, by that red chafe of the collar and
those bulging muscles. His roughness frightened her; each roughness of
speech was an insult to her ear, each rough phase of his life an insult
to her soul. And ever and again would come the draw of him, till she
thought he must be evil to have such power over her. All that was most
firmly established in her mind was rocking. His romance and adventure
were battering at the conventions. Before his facile perils and ready
laugh, life was no longer an affair of serious effort and restraint,
but a toy, to be played with and turned topsy-turvy, carelessly to be
lived and pleasured in, and carelessly to be flung aside. “Therefore,
play!” was the cry that rang through her. “Lean toward him, if so you
will, and place your two hands upon his neck!” She wanted to cry out at
the recklessness of the thought, and in vain she appraised her own
cleanness and culture and balanced all that she was against what he was
not. She glanced about her and saw the others gazing at him with rapt
attention; and she would have despaired had not she seen horror in her
mother’s eyes—fascinated horror, it was true, but none the less horror.
This man from outer darkness was evil. Her mother saw it, and her
mother was right. She would trust her mother’s judgment in this as she
had always trusted it in all things. The fire of him was no longer
warm, and the fear of him was no longer poignant.

Later, at the piano, she played for him, and at him, aggressively, with
the vague intent of emphasizing the impassableness of the gulf that
separated them. Her music was a club that she swung brutally upon his
head; and though it stunned him and crushed him down, it incited him.
He gazed upon her in awe. In his mind, as in her own, the gulf widened;
but faster than it widened, towered his ambition to win across it. But
he was too complicated a plexus of sensibilities to sit staring at a
gulf a whole evening, especially when there was music. He was
remarkably susceptible to music. It was like strong drink, firing him
to audacities of feeling,—a drug that laid hold of his imagination and
went cloud-soaring through the sky. It banished sordid fact, flooded
his mind with beauty, loosed romance and to its heels added wings. He
did not understand the music she played. It was different from the
dance-hall piano-banging and blatant brass bands he had heard. But he
had caught hints of such music from the books, and he accepted her
playing largely on faith, patiently waiting, at first, for the lilting
measures of pronounced and simple rhythm, puzzled because those
measures were not long continued. Just as he caught the swing of them
and started, his imagination attuned in flight, always they vanished
away in a chaotic scramble of sounds that was meaningless to him, and
that dropped his imagination, an inert weight, back to earth.

Once, it entered his mind that there was a deliberate rebuff in all
this. He caught her spirit of antagonism and strove to divine the
message that her hands pronounced upon the keys. Then he dismissed the
thought as unworthy and impossible, and yielded himself more freely to
the music. The old delightful condition began to be induced. His feet
were no longer clay, and his flesh became spirit; before his eyes and
behind his eyes shone a great glory; and then the scene before him
vanished and he was away, rocking over the world that was to him a very
dear world. The known and the unknown were commingled in the
dream-pageant that thronged his vision. He entered strange ports of
sun-washed lands, and trod market-places among barbaric peoples that no
man had ever seen. The scent of the spice islands was in his nostrils
as he had known it on warm, breathless nights at sea, or he beat up
against the southeast trades through long tropic days, sinking
palm-tufted coral islets in the turquoise sea behind and lifting
palm-tufted coral islets in the turquoise sea ahead. Swift as thought
the pictures came and went. One instant he was astride a broncho and
flying through the fairy-colored Painted Desert country; the next
instant he was gazing down through shimmering heat into the whited
sepulchre of Death Valley, or pulling an oar on a freezing ocean where
great ice islands towered and glistened in the sun. He lay on a coral
beach where the cocoanuts grew down to the mellow-sounding surf. The
hulk of an ancient wreck burned with blue fires, in the light of which
danced the _hula_ dancers to the barbaric love-calls of the singers,
who chanted to tinkling _ukuleles_ and rumbling tom-toms. It was a
sensuous, tropic night. In the background a volcano crater was
silhouetted against the stars. Overhead drifted a pale crescent moon,
and the Southern Cross burned low in the sky.

He was a harp; all life that he had known and that was his
consciousness was the strings; and the flood of music was a wind that
poured against those strings and set them vibrating with memories and
dreams. He did not merely feel. Sensation invested itself in form and
color and radiance, and what his imagination dared, it objectified in
some sublimated and magic way. Past, present, and future mingled; and
he went on oscillating across the broad, warm world, through high
adventure and noble deeds to Her—ay, and with her, winning her, his arm
about her, and carrying her on in flight through the empery of his
mind.

And she, glancing at him across her shoulder, saw something of all this
in his face. It was a transfigured face, with great shining eyes that
gazed beyond the veil of sound and saw behind it the leap and pulse of
life and the gigantic phantoms of the spirit. She was startled. The
raw, stumbling lout was gone. The ill-fitting clothes, battered hands,
and sunburned face remained; but these seemed the prison-bars through
which she saw a great soul looking forth, inarticulate and dumb because
of those feeble lips that would not give it speech. Only for a flashing
moment did she see this, then she saw the lout returned, and she
laughed at the whim of her fancy. But the impression of that fleeting
glimpse lingered, and when the time came for him to beat a stumbling
retreat and go, she lent him the volume of Swinburne, and another of
Browning—she was studying Browning in one of her English courses. He
seemed such a boy, as he stood blushing and stammering his thanks, that
a wave of pity, maternal in its prompting, welled up in her. She did
not remember the lout, nor the imprisoned soul, nor the man who had
stared at her in all masculineness and delighted and frightened her.
She saw before her only a boy, who was shaking her hand with a hand so
calloused that it felt like a nutmeg-grater and rasped her skin, and
who was saying jerkily:-

“The greatest time of my life. You see, I ain’t used to things. . . ”
He looked about him helplessly. “To people and houses like this. It’s
all new to me, and I like it.”

“I hope you’ll call again,” she said, as he was saying good night to
her brothers.

He pulled on his cap, lurched desperately through the doorway, and was
gone.

“Well, what do you think of him?” Arthur demanded.

“He is most interesting, a whiff of ozone,” she answered. “How old is
he?”

“Twenty—almost twenty-one. I asked him this afternoon. I didn’t think
he was that young.”

And I am three years older, was the thought in her mind as she kissed
her brothers goodnight.




CHAPTER III.


As Martin Eden went down the steps, his hand dropped into his coat
pocket. It came out with a brown rice paper and a pinch of Mexican
tobacco, which were deftly rolled together into a cigarette. He drew
the first whiff of smoke deep into his lungs and expelled it in a long
and lingering exhalation. “By God!” he said aloud, in a voice of awe
and wonder. “By God!” he repeated. And yet again he murmured, “By God!”
Then his hand went to his collar, which he ripped out of the shirt and
stuffed into his pocket. A cold drizzle was falling, but he bared his
head to it and unbuttoned his vest, swinging along in splendid
unconcern. He was only dimly aware that it was raining. He was in an
ecstasy, dreaming dreams and reconstructing the scenes just past.

He had met the woman at last—the woman that he had thought little
about, not being given to thinking about women, but whom he had
expected, in a remote way, he would sometime meet. He had sat next to
her at table. He had felt her hand in his, he had looked into her eyes
and caught a vision of a beautiful spirit;—but no more beautiful than
the eyes through which it shone, nor than the flesh that gave it
expression and form. He did not think of her flesh as flesh,—which was
new to him; for of the women he had known that was the only way he
thought. Her flesh was somehow different. He did not conceive of her
body as a body, subject to the ills and frailties of bodies. Her body
was more than the garb of her spirit. It was an emanation of her
spirit, a pure and gracious crystallization of her divine essence. This
feeling of the divine startled him. It shocked him from his dreams to
sober thought. No word, no clew, no hint, of the divine had ever
reached him before. He had never believed in the divine. He had always
been irreligious, scoffing good-naturedly at the sky-pilots and their
immortality of the soul. There was no life beyond, he had contended; it
was here and now, then darkness everlasting. But what he had seen in
her eyes was soul—immortal soul that could never die. No man he had
known, nor any woman, had given him the message of immortality. But she
had. She had whispered it to him the first moment she looked at him.
Her face shimmered before his eyes as he walked along,—pale and
serious, sweet and sensitive, smiling with pity and tenderness as only
a spirit could smile, and pure as he had never dreamed purity could be.
Her purity smote him like a blow. It startled him. He had known good
and bad; but purity, as an attribute of existence, had never entered
his mind. And now, in her, he conceived purity to be the superlative of
goodness and of cleanness, the sum of which constituted eternal life.

And promptly urged his ambition to grasp at eternal life. He was not
fit to carry water for her—he knew that; it was a miracle of luck and a
fantastic stroke that had enabled him to see her and be with her and
talk with her that night. It was accidental. There was no merit in it.
He did not deserve such fortune. His mood was essentially religious. He
was humble and meek, filled with self-disparagement and abasement. In
such frame of mind sinners come to the penitent form. He was convicted
of sin. But as the meek and lowly at the penitent form catch splendid
glimpses of their future lordly existence, so did he catch similar
glimpses of the state he would gain to by possessing her. But this
possession of her was dim and nebulous and totally different from
possession as he had known it. Ambition soared on mad wings, and he saw
himself climbing the heights with her, sharing thoughts with her,
pleasuring in beautiful and noble things with her. It was a
soul-possession he dreamed, refined beyond any grossness, a free
comradeship of spirit that he could not put into definite thought. He
did not think it. For that matter, he did not think at all. Sensation
usurped reason, and he was quivering and palpitant with emotions he had
never known, drifting deliciously on a sea of sensibility where feeling
itself was exalted and spiritualized and carried beyond the summits of
life.

He staggered along like a drunken man, murmuring fervently aloud: “By
God! By God!”

A policeman on a street corner eyed him suspiciously, then noted his
sailor roll.

“Where did you get it?” the policeman demanded.

Martin Eden came back to earth. His was a fluid organism, swiftly
adjustable, capable of flowing into and filling all sorts of nooks and
crannies. With the policeman’s hail he was immediately his ordinary
self, grasping the situation clearly.

“It’s a beaut, ain’t it?” he laughed back. “I didn’t know I was talkin’
out loud.”

“You’ll be singing next,” was the policeman’s diagnosis.

“No, I won’t. Gimme a match an’ I’ll catch the next car home.”

He lighted his cigarette, said good night, and went on. “Now wouldn’t
that rattle you?” he ejaculated under his breath. “That copper thought
I was drunk.” He smiled to himself and meditated. “I guess I was,” he
added; “but I didn’t think a woman’s face’d do it.”

He caught a Telegraph Avenue car that was going to Berkeley. It was
crowded with youths and young men who were singing songs and ever and
again barking out college yells. He studied them curiously. They were
university boys. They went to the same university that she did, were in
her class socially, could know her, could see her every day if they
wanted to. He wondered that they did not want to, that they had been
out having a good time instead of being with her that evening, talking
with her, sitting around her in a worshipful and adoring circle. His
thoughts wandered on. He noticed one with narrow-slitted eyes and a
loose-lipped mouth. That fellow was vicious, he decided. On shipboard
he would be a sneak, a whiner, a tattler. He, Martin Eden, was a better
man than that fellow. The thought cheered him. It seemed to draw him
nearer to Her. He began comparing himself with the students. He grew
conscious of the muscled mechanism of his body and felt confident that
he was physically their master. But their heads were filled with
knowledge that enabled them to talk her talk,—the thought depressed
him. But what was a brain for? he demanded passionately. What they had
done, he could do. They had been studying about life from the books
while he had been busy living life. His brain was just as full of
knowledge as theirs, though it was a different kind of knowledge. How
many of them could tie a lanyard knot, or take a wheel or a lookout?
His life spread out before him in a series of pictures of danger and
daring, hardship and toil. He remembered his failures and scrapes in
the process of learning. He was that much to the good, anyway. Later on
they would have to begin living life and going through the mill as he
had gone. Very well. While they were busy with that, he could be
learning the other side of life from the books.

As the car crossed the zone of scattered dwellings that separated
Oakland from Berkeley, he kept a lookout for a familiar, two-story
building along the front of which ran the proud sign, HIGGINBOTHAM’S
CASH STORE. Martin Eden got off at this corner. He stared up for a
moment at the sign. It carried a message to him beyond its mere
wording. A personality of smallness and egotism and petty
underhandedness seemed to emanate from the letters themselves. Bernard
Higginbotham had married his sister, and he knew him well. He let
himself in with a latch-key and climbed the stairs to the second floor.
Here lived his brother-in-law. The grocery was below. There was a smell
of stale vegetables in the air. As he groped his way across the hall he
stumbled over a toy-cart, left there by one of his numerous nephews and
nieces, and brought up against a door with a resounding bang. “The
pincher,” was his thought; “too miserly to burn two cents’ worth of gas
and save his boarders’ necks.”

He fumbled for the knob and entered a lighted room, where sat his
sister and Bernard Higginbotham. She was patching a pair of his
trousers, while his lean body was distributed over two chairs, his feet
dangling in dilapidated carpet-slippers over the edge of the second
chair. He glanced across the top of the paper he was reading, showing a
pair of dark, insincere, sharp-staring eyes. Martin Eden never looked
at him without experiencing a sense of repulsion. What his sister had
seen in the man was beyond him. The other affected him as so much
vermin, and always aroused in him an impulse to crush him under his
foot. “Some day I’ll beat the face off of him,” was the way he often
consoled himself for enduring the man’s existence. The eyes,
weasel-like and cruel, were looking at him complainingly.

“Well,” Martin demanded. “Out with it.”

“I had that door painted only last week,” Mr. Higginbotham half whined,
half bullied; “and you know what union wages are. You should be more
careful.”

Martin had intended to reply, but he was struck by the hopelessness of
it. He gazed across the monstrous sordidness of soul to a chromo on the
wall. It surprised him. He had always liked it, but it seemed that now
he was seeing it for the first time. It was cheap, that was what it
was, like everything else in this house. His mind went back to the
house he had just left, and he saw, first, the paintings, and next,
Her, looking at him with melting sweetness as she shook his hand at
leaving. He forgot where he was and Bernard Higginbotham’s existence,
till that gentleman demanded:-

“Seen a ghost?”

Martin came back and looked at the beady eyes, sneering, truculent,
cowardly, and there leaped into his vision, as on a screen, the same
eyes when their owner was making a sale in the store below—subservient
eyes, smug, and oily, and flattering.

“Yes,” Martin answered. “I seen a ghost. Good night. Good night,
Gertrude.”

He started to leave the room, tripping over a loose seam in the
slatternly carpet.

“Don’t bang the door,” Mr. Higginbotham cautioned him.

He felt the blood crawl in his veins, but controlled himself and closed
the door softly behind him.

Mr. Higginbotham looked at his wife exultantly.

“He’s ben drinkin’,” he proclaimed in a hoarse whisper. “I told you he
would.”

She nodded her head resignedly.

“His eyes was pretty shiny,” she confessed; “and he didn’t have no
collar, though he went away with one. But mebbe he didn’t have more’n a
couple of glasses.”

“He couldn’t stand up straight,” asserted her husband. “I watched him.
He couldn’t walk across the floor without stumblin’. You heard ’m
yourself almost fall down in the hall.”

“I think it was over Alice’s cart,” she said. “He couldn’t see it in
the dark.”

Mr. Higginbotham’s voice and wrath began to rise. All day he effaced
himself in the store, reserving for the evening, with his family, the
privilege of being himself.

“I tell you that precious brother of yours was drunk.”

His voice was cold, sharp, and final, his lips stamping the enunciation
of each word like the die of a machine. His wife sighed and remained
silent. She was a large, stout woman, always dressed slatternly and
always tired from the burdens of her flesh, her work, and her husband.

“He’s got it in him, I tell you, from his father,” Mr. Higginbotham
went on accusingly. “An’ he’ll croak in the gutter the same way. You
know that.”

She nodded, sighed, and went on stitching. They were agreed that Martin
had come home drunk. They did not have it in their souls to know
beauty, or they would have known that those shining eyes and that
glowing face betokened youth’s first vision of love.

“Settin’ a fine example to the children,” Mr. Higginbotham snorted,
suddenly, in the silence for which his wife was responsible and which
he resented. Sometimes he almost wished she would oppose him more. “If
he does it again, he’s got to get out. Understand! I won’t put up with
his shinanigan—debotchin’ innocent children with his boozing.” Mr.
Higginbotham liked the word, which was a new one in his vocabulary,
recently gleaned from a newspaper column. “That’s what it is,
debotchin’—there ain’t no other name for it.”

Still his wife sighed, shook her head sorrowfully, and stitched on. Mr.
Higginbotham resumed the newspaper.

“Has he paid last week’s board?” he shot across the top of the
newspaper.

She nodded, then added, “He still has some money.”

“When is he goin’ to sea again?”

“When his pay-day’s spent, I guess,” she answered. “He was over to San
Francisco yesterday looking for a ship. But he’s got money, yet, an’
he’s particular about the kind of ship he signs for.”

“It’s not for a deck-swab like him to put on airs,” Mr. Higginbotham
snorted. “Particular! Him!”

“He said something about a schooner that’s gettin’ ready to go off to
some outlandish place to look for buried treasure, that he’d sail on
her if his money held out.”

“If he only wanted to steady down, I’d give him a job drivin’ the
wagon,” her husband said, but with no trace of benevolence in his
voice. “Tom’s quit.”

His wife looked alarm and interrogation.

“Quit to-night. Is goin’ to work for Carruthers. They paid ’m more’n I
could afford.”

“I told you you’d lose ’m,” she cried out. “He was worth more’n you was
giving him.”

“Now look here, old woman,” Higginbotham bullied, “for the thousandth
time I’ve told you to keep your nose out of the business. I won’t tell
you again.”

“I don’t care,” she sniffled. “Tom was a good boy.” Her husband glared
at her. This was unqualified defiance.

“If that brother of yours was worth his salt, he could take the wagon,”
he snorted.

“He pays his board, just the same,” was the retort. “An’ he’s my
brother, an’ so long as he don’t owe you money you’ve got no right to
be jumping on him all the time. I’ve got some feelings, if I have been
married to you for seven years.”

“Did you tell ’m you’d charge him for gas if he goes on readin’ in
bed?” he demanded.

Mrs. Higginbotham made no reply. Her revolt faded away, her spirit
wilting down into her tired flesh. Her husband was triumphant. He had
her. His eyes snapped vindictively, while his ears joyed in the
sniffles she emitted. He extracted great happiness from squelching her,
and she squelched easily these days, though it had been different in
the first years of their married life, before the brood of children and
his incessant nagging had sapped her energy.

“Well, you tell ’m to-morrow, that’s all,” he said. “An’ I just want to
tell you, before I forget it, that you’d better send for Marian
to-morrow to take care of the children. With Tom quit, I’ll have to be
out on the wagon, an’ you can make up your mind to it to be down below
waitin’ on the counter.”

“But to-morrow’s wash day,” she objected weakly.

“Get up early, then, an’ do it first. I won’t start out till ten
o’clock.”

He crinkled the paper viciously and resumed his reading.




CHAPTER IV.


Martin Eden, with blood still crawling from contact with his
brother-in-law, felt his way along the unlighted back hall and entered
his room, a tiny cubbyhole with space for a bed, a wash-stand, and one
chair. Mr. Higginbotham was too thrifty to keep a servant when his wife
could do the work. Besides, the servant’s room enabled them to take in
two boarders instead of one. Martin placed the Swinburne and Browning
on the chair, took off his coat, and sat down on the bed. A screeching
of asthmatic springs greeted the weight of his body, but he did not
notice them. He started to take off his shoes, but fell to staring at
the white plaster wall opposite him, broken by long streaks of dirty
brown where rain had leaked through the roof. On this befouled
background visions began to flow and burn. He forgot his shoes and
stared long, till his lips began to move and he murmured, “Ruth.”

“Ruth.” He had not thought a simple sound could be so beautiful. It
delighted his ear, and he grew intoxicated with the repetition of it.
“Ruth.” It was a talisman, a magic word to conjure with. Each time he
murmured it, her face shimmered before him, suffusing the foul wall
with a golden radiance. This radiance did not stop at the wall. It
extended on into infinity, and through its golden depths his soul went
questing after hers. The best that was in him was out in splendid
flood. The very thought of her ennobled and purified him, made him
better, and made him want to be better. This was new to him. He had
never known women who had made him better. They had always had the
counter effect of making him beastly. He did not know that many of them
had done their best, bad as it was. Never having been conscious of
himself, he did not know that he had that in his being that drew love
from women and which had been the cause of their reaching out for his
youth. Though they had often bothered him, he had never bothered about
them; and he would never have dreamed that there were women who had
been better because of him. Always in sublime carelessness had he
lived, till now, and now it seemed to him that they had always reached
out and dragged at him with vile hands. This was not just to them, nor
to himself. But he, who for the first time was becoming conscious of
himself, was in no condition to judge, and he burned with shame as he
stared at the vision of his infamy.

He got up abruptly and tried to see himself in the dirty looking-glass
over the wash-stand. He passed a towel over it and looked again, long
and carefully. It was the first time he had ever really seen himself.
His eyes were made for seeing, but up to that moment they had been
filled with the ever changing panorama of the world, at which he had
been too busy gazing, ever to gaze at himself. He saw the head and face
of a young fellow of twenty, but, being unused to such appraisement, he
did not know how to value it. Above a square-domed forehead he saw a
mop of brown hair, nut-brown, with a wave to it and hints of curls that
were a delight to any woman, making hands tingle to stroke it and
fingers tingle to pass caresses through it. But he passed it by as
without merit, in Her eyes, and dwelt long and thoughtfully on the
high, square forehead,—striving to penetrate it and learn the quality
of its content. What kind of a brain lay behind there? was his
insistent interrogation. What was it capable of? How far would it take
him? Would it take him to her?

He wondered if there was soul in those steel-gray eyes that were often
quite blue of color and that were strong with the briny airs of the
sun-washed deep. He wondered, also, how his eyes looked to her. He
tried to imagine himself she, gazing into those eyes of his, but failed
in the jugglery. He could successfully put himself inside other men’s
minds, but they had to be men whose ways of life he knew. He did not
know her way of life. She was wonder and mystery, and how could he
guess one thought of hers? Well, they were honest eyes, he concluded,
and in them was neither smallness nor meanness. The brown sunburn of
his face surprised him. He had not dreamed he was so black. He rolled
up his shirt-sleeve and compared the white underside of the arm with
his face. Yes, he was a white man, after all. But the arms were
sunburned, too. He twisted his arm, rolled the biceps over with his
other hand, and gazed underneath where he was least touched by the sun.
It was very white. He laughed at his bronzed face in the glass at the
thought that it was once as white as the underside of his arm; nor did
he dream that in the world there were few pale spirits of women who
could boast fairer or smoother skins than he—fairer than where he had
escaped the ravages of the sun.

His might have been a cherub’s mouth, had not the full, sensuous lips a
trick, under stress, of drawing firmly across the teeth. At times, so
tightly did they draw, the mouth became stern and harsh, even ascetic.
They were the lips of a fighter and of a lover. They could taste the
sweetness of life with relish, and they could put the sweetness aside
and command life. The chin and jaw, strong and just hinting of square
aggressiveness, helped the lips to command life. Strength balanced
sensuousness and had upon it a tonic effect, compelling him to love
beauty that was healthy and making him vibrate to sensations that were
wholesome. And between the lips were teeth that had never known nor
needed the dentist’s care. They were white and strong and regular, he
decided, as he looked at them. But as he looked, he began to be
troubled. Somewhere, stored away in the recesses of his mind and
vaguely remembered, was the impression that there were people who
washed their teeth every day. They were the people from up above—people
in her class. She must wash her teeth every day, too. What would she
think if she learned that he had never washed his teeth in all the days
of his life? He resolved to get a tooth-brush and form the habit. He
would begin at once, to-morrow. It was not by mere achievement that he
could hope to win to her. He must make a personal reform in all things,
even to tooth-washing and neck-gear, though a starched collar affected
him as a renunciation of freedom.

He held up his hand, rubbing the ball of the thumb over the calloused
palm and gazing at the dirt that was ingrained in the flesh itself and
which no brush could scrub away. How different was her palm! He
thrilled deliciously at the remembrance. Like a rose-petal, he thought;
cool and soft as a snowflake. He had never thought that a mere woman’s
hand could be so sweetly soft. He caught himself imagining the wonder
of a caress from such a hand, and flushed guiltily. It was too gross a
thought for her. In ways it seemed to impugn her high spirituality. She
was a pale, slender spirit, exalted far beyond the flesh; but
nevertheless the softness of her palm persisted in his thoughts. He was
used to the harsh callousness of factory girls and working women. Well
he knew why their hands were rough; but this hand of hers . . . It was
soft because she had never used it to work with. The gulf yawned
between her and him at the awesome thought of a person who did not have
to work for a living. He suddenly saw the aristocracy of the people who
did not labor. It towered before him on the wall, a figure in brass,
arrogant and powerful. He had worked himself; his first memories seemed
connected with work, and all his family had worked. There was Gertrude.
When her hands were not hard from the endless housework, they were
swollen and red like boiled beef, what of the washing. And there was
his sister Marian. She had worked in the cannery the preceding summer,
and her slim, pretty hands were all scarred with the tomato-knives.
Besides, the tips of two of her fingers had been left in the cutting
machine at the paper-box factory the preceding winter. He remembered
the hard palms of his mother as she lay in her coffin. And his father
had worked to the last fading gasp; the horned growth on his hands must
have been half an inch thick when he died. But Her hands were soft, and
her mother’s hands, and her brothers’. This last came to him as a
surprise; it was tremendously indicative of the highness of their
caste, of the enormous distance that stretched between her and him.

He sat back on the bed with a bitter laugh, and finished taking off his
shoes. He was a fool; he had been made drunken by a woman’s face and by
a woman’s soft, white hands. And then, suddenly, before his eyes, on
the foul plaster-wall appeared a vision. He stood in front of a gloomy
tenement house. It was night-time, in the East End of London, and
before him stood Margey, a little factory girl of fifteen. He had seen
her home after the bean-feast. She lived in that gloomy tenement, a
place not fit for swine. His hand was going out to hers as he said good
night. She had put her lips up to be kissed, but he wasn’t going to
kiss her. Somehow he was afraid of her. And then her hand closed on his
and pressed feverishly. He felt her callouses grind and grate on his,
and a great wave of pity welled over him. He saw her yearning, hungry
eyes, and her ill-fed female form which had been rushed from childhood
into a frightened and ferocious maturity; then he put his arms about
her in large tolerance and stooped and kissed her on the lips. Her glad
little cry rang in his ears, and he felt her clinging to him like a
cat. Poor little starveling! He continued to stare at the vision of
what had happened in the long ago. His flesh was crawling as it had
crawled that night when she clung to him, and his heart was warm with
pity. It was a gray scene, greasy gray, and the rain drizzled greasily
on the pavement stones. And then a radiant glory shone on the wall, and
up through the other vision, displacing it, glimmered Her pale face
under its crown of golden hair, remote and inaccessible as a star.

He took the Browning and the Swinburne from the chair and kissed them.
Just the same, she told me to call again, he thought. He took another
look at himself in the glass, and said aloud, with great solemnity:-

“Martin Eden, the first thing to-morrow you go to the free library an’
read up on etiquette. Understand!”

He turned off the gas, and the springs shrieked under his body.

“But you’ve got to quit cussin’, Martin, old boy; you’ve got to quit
cussin’,” he said aloud.

Then he dozed off to sleep and to dream dreams that for madness and
audacity rivalled those of poppy-eaters.




CHAPTER V.


He awoke next morning from rosy scenes of dream to a steamy atmosphere
that smelled of soapsuds and dirty clothes, and that was vibrant with
the jar and jangle of tormented life. As he came out of his room he
heard the slosh of water, a sharp exclamation, and a resounding smack
as his sister visited her irritation upon one of her numerous progeny.
The squall of the child went through him like a knife. He was aware
that the whole thing, the very air he breathed, was repulsive and mean.
How different, he thought, from the atmosphere of beauty and repose of
the house wherein Ruth dwelt. There it was all spiritual. Here it was
all material, and meanly material.

“Come here, Alfred,” he called to the crying child, at the same time
thrusting his hand into his trousers pocket, where he carried his money
loose in the same large way that he lived life in general. He put a
quarter in the youngster’s hand and held him in his arms a moment,
soothing his sobs. “Now run along and get some candy, and don’t forget
to give some to your brothers and sisters. Be sure and get the kind
that lasts longest.”

His sister lifted a flushed face from the wash-tub and looked at him.

“A nickel’d ha’ ben enough,” she said. “It’s just like you, no idea of
the value of money. The child’ll eat himself sick.”

“That’s all right, sis,” he answered jovially. “My money’ll take care
of itself. If you weren’t so busy, I’d kiss you good morning.”

He wanted to be affectionate to this sister, who was good, and who, in
her way, he knew, loved him. But, somehow, she grew less herself as the
years went by, and more and more baffling. It was the hard work, the
many children, and the nagging of her husband, he decided, that had
changed her. It came to him, in a flash of fancy, that her nature
seemed taking on the attributes of stale vegetables, smelly soapsuds,
and of the greasy dimes, nickels, and quarters she took in over the
counter of the store.

“Go along an’ get your breakfast,” she said roughly, though secretly
pleased. Of all her wandering brood of brothers he had always been her
favorite. “I declare I _will_ kiss you,” she said, with a sudden stir
at her heart.

With thumb and forefinger she swept the dripping suds first from one
arm and then from the other. He put his arms round her massive waist
and kissed her wet steamy lips. The tears welled into her eyes—not so
much from strength of feeling as from the weakness of chronic overwork.
She shoved him away from her, but not before he caught a glimpse of her
moist eyes.

“You’ll find breakfast in the oven,” she said hurriedly. “Jim ought to
be up now. I had to get up early for the washing. Now get along with
you and get out of the house early. It won’t be nice to-day, what of
Tom quittin’ an’ nobody but Bernard to drive the wagon.”

Martin went into the kitchen with a sinking heart, the image of her red
face and slatternly form eating its way like acid into his brain. She
might love him if she only had some time, he concluded. But she was
worked to death. Bernard Higginbotham was a brute to work her so hard.
But he could not help but feel, on the other hand, that there had not
been anything beautiful in that kiss. It was true, it was an unusual
kiss. For years she had kissed him only when he returned from voyages
or departed on voyages. But this kiss had tasted of soapsuds, and the
lips, he had noticed, were flabby. There had been no quick, vigorous
lip-pressure such as should accompany any kiss. Hers was the kiss of a
tired woman who had been tired so long that she had forgotten how to
kiss. He remembered her as a girl, before her marriage, when she would
dance with the best, all night, after a hard day’s work at the laundry,
and think nothing of leaving the dance to go to another day’s hard
work. And then he thought of Ruth and the cool sweetness that must
reside in her lips as it resided in all about her. Her kiss would be
like her hand-shake or the way she looked at one, firm and frank. In
imagination he dared to think of her lips on his, and so vividly did he
imagine that he went dizzy at the thought and seemed to rift through
clouds of rose-petals, filling his brain with their perfume.

In the kitchen he found Jim, the other boarder, eating mush very
languidly, with a sick, far-away look in his eyes. Jim was a plumber’s
apprentice whose weak chin and hedonistic temperament, coupled with a
certain nervous stupidity, promised to take him nowhere in the race for
bread and butter.

“Why don’t you eat?” he demanded, as Martin dipped dolefully into the
cold, half-cooked oatmeal mush. “Was you drunk again last night?”

Martin shook his head. He was oppressed by the utter squalidness of it
all. Ruth Morse seemed farther removed than ever.

“I was,” Jim went on with a boastful, nervous giggle. “I was loaded
right to the neck. Oh, she was a daisy. Billy brought me home.”

Martin nodded that he heard,—it was a habit of nature with him to pay
heed to whoever talked to him,—and poured a cup of lukewarm coffee.

“Goin’ to the Lotus Club dance to-night?” Jim demanded. “They’re goin’
to have beer, an’ if that Temescal bunch comes, there’ll be a
rough-house. I don’t care, though. I’m takin’ my lady friend just the
same. Cripes, but I’ve got a taste in my mouth!”

He made a wry face and attempted to wash the taste away with coffee.

“D’ye know Julia?”

Martin shook his head.

“She’s my lady friend,” Jim explained, “and she’s a peach. I’d
introduce you to her, only you’d win her. I don’t see what the girls
see in you, honest I don’t; but the way you win them away from the
fellers is sickenin’.”

“I never got any away from you,” Martin answered uninterestedly. The
breakfast had to be got through somehow.

“Yes, you did, too,” the other asserted warmly. “There was Maggie.”

“Never had anything to do with her. Never danced with her except that
one night.”

“Yes, an’ that’s just what did it,” Jim cried out. “You just danced
with her an’ looked at her, an’ it was all off. Of course you didn’t
mean nothin’ by it, but it settled me for keeps. Wouldn’t look at me
again. Always askin’ about you. She’d have made fast dates enough with
you if you’d wanted to.”

“But I didn’t want to.”

“Wasn’t necessary. I was left at the pole.” Jim looked at him
admiringly. “How d’ye do it, anyway, Mart?”

“By not carin’ about ’em,” was the answer.

“You mean makin’ b’lieve you don’t care about them?” Jim queried
eagerly.

Martin considered for a moment, then answered, “Perhaps that will do,
but with me I guess it’s different. I never have cared—much. If you can
put it on, it’s all right, most likely.”

“You should ’a’ ben up at Riley’s barn last night,” Jim announced
inconsequently. “A lot of the fellers put on the gloves. There was a
peach from West Oakland. They called ’m ‘The Rat.’ Slick as silk. No
one could touch ’m. We was all wishin’ you was there. Where was you
anyway?”

“Down in Oakland,” Martin replied.

“To the show?”

Martin shoved his plate away and got up.

“Comin’ to the dance to-night?” the other called after him.

“No, I think not,” he answered.

He went downstairs and out into the street, breathing great breaths of
air. He had been suffocating in that atmosphere, while the apprentice’s
chatter had driven him frantic. There had been times when it was all he
could do to refrain from reaching over and mopping Jim’s face in the
mush-plate. The more he had chattered, the more remote had Ruth seemed
to him. How could he, herding with such cattle, ever become worthy of
her? He was appalled at the problem confronting him, weighted down by
the incubus of his working-class station. Everything reached out to
hold him down—his sister, his sister’s house and family, Jim the
apprentice, everybody he knew, every tie of life. Existence did not
taste good in his mouth. Up to then he had accepted existence, as he
had lived it with all about him, as a good thing. He had never
questioned it, except when he read books; but then, they were only
books, fairy stories of a fairer and impossible world. But now he had
seen that world, possible and real, with a flower of a woman called
Ruth in the midmost centre of it; and thenceforth he must know bitter
tastes, and longings sharp as pain, and hopelessness that tantalized
because it fed on hope.

He had debated between the Berkeley Free Library and the Oakland Free
Library, and decided upon the latter because Ruth lived in Oakland. Who
could tell?—a library was a most likely place for her, and he might see
her there. He did not know the way of libraries, and he wandered
through endless rows of fiction, till the delicate-featured
French-looking girl who seemed in charge, told him that the reference
department was upstairs. He did not know enough to ask the man at the
desk, and began his adventures in the philosophy alcove. He had heard
of book philosophy, but had not imagined there had been so much written
about it. The high, bulging shelves of heavy tomes humbled him and at
the same time stimulated him. Here was work for the vigor of his brain.
He found books on trigonometry in the mathematics section, and ran the
pages, and stared at the meaningless formulas and figures. He could
read English, but he saw there an alien speech. Norman and Arthur knew
that speech. He had heard them talking it. And they were her brothers.
He left the alcove in despair. From every side the books seemed to
press upon him and crush him.

He had never dreamed that the fund of human knowledge bulked so big. He
was frightened. How could his brain ever master it all? Later, he
remembered that there were other men, many men, who had mastered it;
and he breathed a great oath, passionately, under his breath, swearing
that his brain could do what theirs had done.

And so he wandered on, alternating between depression and elation as he
stared at the shelves packed with wisdom. In one miscellaneous section
he came upon a “Norrie’s Epitome.” He turned the pages reverently. In a
way, it spoke a kindred speech. Both he and it were of the sea. Then he
found a “Bowditch” and books by Lecky and Marshall. There it was; he
would teach himself navigation. He would quit drinking, work up, and
become a captain. Ruth seemed very near to him in that moment. As a
captain, he could marry her (if she would have him). And if she
wouldn’t, well—he would live a good life among men, because of Her, and
he would quit drinking anyway. Then he remembered the underwriters and
the owners, the two masters a captain must serve, either of which could
and would break him and whose interests were diametrically opposed. He
cast his eyes about the room and closed the lids down on a vision of
ten thousand books. No; no more of the sea for him. There was power in
all that wealth of books, and if he would do great things, he must do
them on the land. Besides, captains were not allowed to take their
wives to sea with them.

Noon came, and afternoon. He forgot to eat, and sought on for the books
on etiquette; for, in addition to career, his mind was vexed by a
simple and very concrete problem: _When you meet a young lady and she
asks you to call, how soon can you call_? was the way he worded it to
himself. But when he found the right shelf, he sought vainly for the
answer. He was appalled at the vast edifice of etiquette, and lost
himself in the mazes of visiting-card conduct between persons in polite
society. He abandoned his search. He had not found what he wanted,
though he had found that it would take all of a man’s time to be
polite, and that he would have to live a preliminary life in which to
learn how to be polite.

“Did you find what you wanted?” the man at the desk asked him as he was
leaving.

“Yes, sir,” he answered. “You have a fine library here.”

The man nodded. “We should be glad to see you here often. Are you a
sailor?”

“Yes, sir,” he answered. “And I’ll come again.”

Now, how did he know that? he asked himself as he went down the stairs.

And for the first block along the street he walked very stiff and
straight and awkwardly, until he forgot himself in his thoughts,
whereupon his rolling gait gracefully returned to him.




CHAPTER VI.


A terrible restlessness that was akin to hunger afflicted Martin Eden.
He was famished for a sight of the girl whose slender hands had gripped
his life with a giant’s grasp. He could not steel himself to call upon
her. He was afraid that he might call too soon, and so be guilty of an
awful breach of that awful thing called etiquette. He spent long hours
in the Oakland and Berkeley libraries, and made out application blanks
for membership for himself, his sisters Gertrude and Marian, and Jim,
the latter’s consent being obtained at the expense of several glasses
of beer. With four cards permitting him to draw books, he burned the
gas late in the servant’s room, and was charged fifty cents a week for
it by Mr. Higginbotham.

The many books he read but served to whet his unrest. Every page of
every book was a peep-hole into the realm of knowledge. His hunger fed
upon what he read, and increased. Also, he did not know where to begin,
and continually suffered from lack of preparation. The commonest
references, that he could see plainly every reader was expected to
know, he did not know. And the same was true of the poetry he read
which maddened him with delight. He read more of Swinburne than was
contained in the volume Ruth had lent him; and “Dolores” he understood
thoroughly. But surely Ruth did not understand it, he concluded. How
could she, living the refined life she did? Then he chanced upon
Kipling’s poems, and was swept away by the lilt and swing and glamour
with which familiar things had been invested. He was amazed at the
man’s sympathy with life and at his incisive psychology. _Psychology_
was a new word in Martin’s vocabulary. He had bought a dictionary,
which deed had decreased his supply of money and brought nearer the day
on which he must sail in search of more. Also, it incensed Mr.
Higginbotham, who would have preferred the money taking the form of
board.

He dared not go near Ruth’s neighborhood in the daytime, but night
found him lurking like a thief around the Morse home, stealing glimpses
at the windows and loving the very walls that sheltered her. Several
times he barely escaped being caught by her brothers, and once he
trailed Mr. Morse down town and studied his face in the lighted
streets, longing all the while for some quick danger of death to
threaten so that he might spring in and save her father. On another
night, his vigil was rewarded by a glimpse of Ruth through a
second-story window. He saw only her head and shoulders, and her arms
raised as she fixed her hair before a mirror. It was only for a moment,
but it was a long moment to him, during which his blood turned to wine
and sang through his veins. Then she pulled down the shade. But it was
her room—he had learned that; and thereafter he strayed there often,
hiding under a dark tree on the opposite side of the street and smoking
countless cigarettes. One afternoon he saw her mother coming out of a
bank, and received another proof of the enormous distance that
separated Ruth from him. She was of the class that dealt with banks. He
had never been inside a bank in his life, and he had an idea that such
institutions were frequented only by the very rich and the very
powerful.

In one way, he had undergone a moral revolution. Her cleanness and
purity had reacted upon him, and he felt in his being a crying need to
be clean. He must be that if he were ever to be worthy of breathing the
same air with her. He washed his teeth, and scrubbed his hands with a
kitchen scrub-brush till he saw a nail-brush in a drug-store window and
divined its use. While purchasing it, the clerk glanced at his nails,
suggested a nail-file, and so he became possessed of an additional
toilet-tool. He ran across a book in the library on the care of the
body, and promptly developed a penchant for a cold-water bath every
morning, much to the amazement of Jim, and to the bewilderment of Mr.
Higginbotham, who was not in sympathy with such high-fangled notions
and who seriously debated whether or not he should charge Martin extra
for the water. Another stride was in the direction of creased trousers.
Now that Martin was aroused in such matters, he swiftly noted the
difference between the baggy knees of the trousers worn by the working
class and the straight line from knee to foot of those worn by the men
above the working class. Also, he learned the reason why, and invaded
his sister’s kitchen in search of irons and ironing-board. He had
misadventures at first, hopelessly burning one pair and buying another,
which expenditure again brought nearer the day on which he must put to
sea.

But the reform went deeper than mere outward appearance. He still
smoked, but he drank no more. Up to that time, drinking had seemed to
him the proper thing for men to do, and he had prided himself on his
strong head which enabled him to drink most men under the table.
Whenever he encountered a chance shipmate, and there were many in San
Francisco, he treated them and was treated in turn, as of old, but he
ordered for himself root beer or ginger ale and good-naturedly endured
their chaffing. And as they waxed maudlin he studied them, watching the
beast rise and master them and thanking God that he was no longer as
they. They had their limitations to forget, and when they were drunk,
their dim, stupid spirits were even as gods, and each ruled in his
heaven of intoxicated desire. With Martin the need for strong drink had
vanished. He was drunken in new and more profound ways—with Ruth, who
had fired him with love and with a glimpse of higher and eternal life;
with books, that had set a myriad maggots of desire gnawing in his
brain; and with the sense of personal cleanliness he was achieving,
that gave him even more superb health than what he had enjoyed and that
made his whole body sing with physical well-being.

One night he went to the theatre, on the blind chance that he might see
her there, and from the second balcony he did see her. He saw her come
down the aisle, with Arthur and a strange young man with a football mop
of hair and eyeglasses, the sight of whom spurred him to instant
apprehension and jealousy. He saw her take her seat in the orchestra
circle, and little else than her did he see that night—a pair of
slender white shoulders and a mass of pale gold hair, dim with
distance. But there were others who saw, and now and again, glancing at
those about him, he noted two young girls who looked back from the row
in front, a dozen seats along, and who smiled at him with bold eyes. He
had always been easy-going. It was not in his nature to give rebuff. In
the old days he would have smiled back, and gone further and encouraged
smiling. But now it was different. He did smile back, then looked away,
and looked no more deliberately. But several times, forgetting the
existence of the two girls, his eyes caught their smiles. He could not
re-thumb himself in a day, nor could he violate the intrinsic
kindliness of his nature; so, at such moments, he smiled at the girls
in warm human friendliness. It was nothing new to him. He knew they
were reaching out their woman’s hands to him. But it was different now.
Far down there in the orchestra circle was the one woman in all the
world, so different, so terrifically different, from these two girls of
his class, that he could feel for them only pity and sorrow. He had it
in his heart to wish that they could possess, in some small measure,
her goodness and glory. And not for the world could he hurt them
because of their outreaching. He was not flattered by it; he even felt
a slight shame at his lowliness that permitted it. He knew, did he
belong in Ruth’s class, that there would be no overtures from these
girls; and with each glance of theirs he felt the fingers of his own
class clutching at him to hold him down.

He left his seat before the curtain went down on the last act, intent
on seeing Her as she passed out. There were always numbers of men who
stood on the sidewalk outside, and he could pull his cap down over his
eyes and screen himself behind some one’s shoulder so that she should
not see him. He emerged from the theatre with the first of the crowd;
but scarcely had he taken his position on the edge of the sidewalk when
the two girls appeared. They were looking for him, he knew; and for the
moment he could have cursed that in him which drew women. Their casual
edging across the sidewalk to the curb, as they drew near, apprised him
of discovery. They slowed down, and were in the thick of the crowd as
they came up with him. One of them brushed against him and apparently
for the first time noticed him. She was a slender, dark girl, with
black, defiant eyes. But they smiled at him, and he smiled back.

“Hello,” he said.

It was automatic; he had said it so often before under similar
circumstances of first meetings. Besides, he could do no less. There
was that large tolerance and sympathy in his nature that would permit
him to do no less. The black-eyed girl smiled gratification and
greeting, and showed signs of stopping, while her companion, arm linked
in arm, giggled and likewise showed signs of halting. He thought
quickly. It would never do for Her to come out and see him talking
there with them. Quite naturally, as a matter of course, he swung in
along-side the dark-eyed one and walked with her. There was no
awkwardness on his part, no numb tongue. He was at home here, and he
held his own royally in the badinage, bristling with slang and
sharpness, that was always the preliminary to getting acquainted in
these swift-moving affairs. At the corner where the main stream of
people flowed onward, he started to edge out into the cross street. But
the girl with the black eyes caught his arm, following him and dragging
her companion after her, as she cried:

“Hold on, Bill! What’s yer rush? You’re not goin’ to shake us so sudden
as all that?”

He halted with a laugh, and turned, facing them. Across their shoulders
he could see the moving throng passing under the street lamps. Where he
stood it was not so light, and, unseen, he would be able to see Her as
she passed by. She would certainly pass by, for that way led home.

“What’s her name?” he asked of the giggling girl, nodding at the
dark-eyed one.

“You ask her,” was the convulsed response.

“Well, what is it?” he demanded, turning squarely on the girl in
question.

“You ain’t told me yours, yet,” she retorted.

“You never asked it,” he smiled. “Besides, you guessed the first
rattle. It’s Bill, all right, all right.”

“Aw, go ’long with you.” She looked him in the eyes, her own sharply
passionate and inviting. “What is it, honest?”

Again she looked. All the centuries of woman since sex began were
eloquent in her eyes. And he measured her in a careless way, and knew,
bold now, that she would begin to retreat, coyly and delicately, as he
pursued, ever ready to reverse the game should he turn fainthearted.
And, too, he was human, and could feel the draw of her, while his ego
could not but appreciate the flattery of her kindness. Oh, he knew it
all, and knew them well, from A to Z. Good, as goodness might be
measured in their particular class, hard-working for meagre wages and
scorning the sale of self for easier ways, nervously desirous for some
small pinch of happiness in the desert of existence, and facing a
future that was a gamble between the ugliness of unending toil and the
black pit of more terrible wretchedness, the way whereto being briefer
though better paid.

“Bill,” he answered, nodding his head. “Sure, Pete, Bill an’ no other.”

“No joshin’?” she queried.

“It ain’t Bill at all,” the other broke in.

“How do you know?” he demanded. “You never laid eyes on me before.”

“No need to, to know you’re lyin’,” was the retort.

“Straight, Bill, what is it?” the first girl asked.

“Bill’ll do,” he confessed.

She reached out to his arm and shook him playfully. “I knew you was
lyin’, but you look good to me just the same.”

He captured the hand that invited, and felt on the palm familiar
markings and distortions.

“When’d you chuck the cannery?” he asked.

“How’d yeh know?” and, “My, ain’t cheh a mind-reader!” the girls
chorussed.

And while he exchanged the stupidities of stupid minds with them,
before his inner sight towered the book-shelves of the library, filled
with the wisdom of the ages. He smiled bitterly at the incongruity of
it, and was assailed by doubts. But between inner vision and outward
pleasantry he found time to watch the theatre crowd streaming by. And
then he saw Her, under the lights, between her brother and the strange
young man with glasses, and his heart seemed to stand still. He had
waited long for this moment. He had time to note the light, fluffy
something that hid her queenly head, the tasteful lines of her wrapped
figure, the gracefulness of her carriage and of the hand that caught up
her skirts; and then she was gone and he was left staring at the two
girls of the cannery, at their tawdry attempts at prettiness of dress,
their tragic efforts to be clean and trim, the cheap cloth, the cheap
ribbons, and the cheap rings on the fingers. He felt a tug at his arm,
and heard a voice saying:-

“Wake up, Bill! What’s the matter with you?”

“What was you sayin’?” he asked.

“Oh, nothin’,” the dark girl answered, with a toss of her head. “I was
only remarkin’—”

“What?”

“Well, I was whisperin’ it’d be a good idea if you could dig up a
gentleman friend—for her” (indicating her companion), “and then, we
could go off an’ have ice-cream soda somewhere, or coffee, or
anything.”

He was afflicted by a sudden spiritual nausea. The transition from Ruth
to this had been too abrupt. Ranged side by side with the bold, defiant
eyes of the girl before him, he saw Ruth’s clear, luminous eyes, like a
saint’s, gazing at him out of unplumbed depths of purity. And, somehow,
he felt within him a stir of power. He was better than this. Life meant
more to him than it meant to these two girls whose thoughts did not go
beyond ice-cream and a gentleman friend. He remembered that he had led
always a secret life in his thoughts. These thoughts he had tried to
share, but never had he found a woman capable of understanding—nor a
man. He had tried, at times, but had only puzzled his listeners. And as
his thoughts had been beyond them, so, he argued now, he must be beyond
them. He felt power move in him, and clenched his fists. If life meant
more to him, then it was for him to demand more from life, but he could
not demand it from such companionship as this. Those bold black eyes
had nothing to offer. He knew the thoughts behind them—of ice-cream and
of something else. But those saint’s eyes alongside—they offered all he
knew and more than he could guess. They offered books and painting,
beauty and repose, and all the fine elegance of higher existence.
Behind those black eyes he knew every thought process. It was like
clockwork. He could watch every wheel go around. Their bid was low
pleasure, narrow as the grave, that palled, and the grave was at the
end of it. But the bid of the saint’s eyes was mystery, and wonder
unthinkable, and eternal life. He had caught glimpses of the soul in
them, and glimpses of his own soul, too.

“There’s only one thing wrong with the programme,” he said aloud. “I’ve
got a date already.”

The girl’s eyes blazed her disappointment.

“To sit up with a sick friend, I suppose?” she sneered.

“No, a real, honest date with—” he faltered, “with a girl.”

“You’re not stringin’ me?” she asked earnestly.

He looked her in the eyes and answered: “It’s straight, all right. But
why can’t we meet some other time? You ain’t told me your name yet. An’
where d’ye live?”

“Lizzie,” she replied, softening toward him, her hand pressing his arm,
while her body leaned against his. “Lizzie Connolly. And I live at
Fifth an’ Market.”

He talked on a few minutes before saying good night. He did not go home
immediately; and under the tree where he kept his vigils he looked up
at a window and murmured: “That date was with you, Ruth. I kept it for
you.”




CHAPTER VII.


A week of heavy reading had passed since the evening he first met Ruth
Morse, and still he dared not call. Time and again he nerved himself up
to call, but under the doubts that assailed him his determination died
away. He did not know the proper time to call, nor was there any one to
tell him, and he was afraid of committing himself to an irretrievable
blunder. Having shaken himself free from his old companions and old
ways of life, and having no new companions, nothing remained for him
but to read, and the long hours he devoted to it would have ruined a
dozen pairs of ordinary eyes. But his eyes were strong, and they were
backed by a body superbly strong. Furthermore, his mind was fallow. It
had lain fallow all his life so far as the abstract thought of the
books was concerned, and it was ripe for the sowing. It had never been
jaded by study, and it bit hold of the knowledge in the books with
sharp teeth that would not let go.

It seemed to him, by the end of the week, that he had lived centuries,
so far behind were the old life and outlook. But he was baffled by lack
of preparation. He attempted to read books that required years of
preliminary specialization. One day he would read a book of antiquated
philosophy, and the next day one that was ultra-modern, so that his
head would be whirling with the conflict and contradiction of ideas. It
was the same with the economists. On the one shelf at the library he
found Karl Marx, Ricardo, Adam Smith, and Mill, and the abstruse
formulas of the one gave no clew that the ideas of another were
obsolete. He was bewildered, and yet he wanted to know. He had become
interested, in a day, in economics, industry, and politics. Passing
through the City Hall Park, he had noticed a group of men, in the
centre of which were half a dozen, with flushed faces and raised
voices, earnestly carrying on a discussion. He joined the listeners,
and heard a new, alien tongue in the mouths of the philosophers of the
people. One was a tramp, another was a labor agitator, a third was a
law-school student, and the remainder was composed of wordy workingmen.
For the first time he heard of socialism, anarchism, and single tax,
and learned that there were warring social philosophies. He heard
hundreds of technical words that were new to him, belonging to fields
of thought that his meagre reading had never touched upon. Because of
this he could not follow the arguments closely, and he could only guess
at and surmise the ideas wrapped up in such strange expressions. Then
there was a black-eyed restaurant waiter who was a theosophist, a union
baker who was an agnostic, an old man who baffled all of them with the
strange philosophy that _what is is right_, and another old man who
discoursed interminably about the cosmos and the father-atom and the
mother-atom.

Martin Eden’s head was in a state of addlement when he went away after
several hours, and he hurried to the library to look up the definitions
of a dozen unusual words. And when he left the library, he carried
under his arm four volumes: Madam Blavatsky’s “Secret Doctrine,”
“Progress and Poverty,” “The Quintessence of Socialism,” and “Warfare
of Religion and Science.” Unfortunately, he began on the “Secret
Doctrine.” Every line bristled with many-syllabled words he did not
understand. He sat up in bed, and the dictionary was in front of him
more often than the book. He looked up so many new words that when they
recurred, he had forgotten their meaning and had to look them up again.
He devised the plan of writing the definitions in a note-book, and
filled page after page with them. And still he could not understand. He
read until three in the morning, and his brain was in a turmoil, but
not one essential thought in the text had he grasped. He looked up, and
it seemed that the room was lifting, heeling, and plunging like a ship
upon the sea. Then he hurled the “Secret Doctrine” and many curses
across the room, turned off the gas, and composed himself to sleep. Nor
did he have much better luck with the other three books. It was not
that his brain was weak or incapable; it could think these thoughts
were it not for lack of training in thinking and lack of the
thought-tools with which to think. He guessed this, and for a while
entertained the idea of reading nothing but the dictionary until he had
mastered every word in it.

Poetry, however, was his solace, and he read much of it, finding his
greatest joy in the simpler poets, who were more understandable. He
loved beauty, and there he found beauty. Poetry, like music, stirred
him profoundly, and, though he did not know it, he was preparing his
mind for the heavier work that was to come. The pages of his mind were
blank, and, without effort, much he read and liked, stanza by stanza,
was impressed upon those pages, so that he was soon able to extract
great joy from chanting aloud or under his breath the music and the
beauty of the printed words he had read. Then he stumbled upon Gayley’s
“Classic Myths” and Bulfinch’s “Age of Fable,” side by side on a
library shelf. It was illumination, a great light in the darkness of
his ignorance, and he read poetry more avidly than ever.

The man at the desk in the library had seen Martin there so often that
he had become quite cordial, always greeting him with a smile and a nod
when he entered. It was because of this that Martin did a daring thing.
Drawing out some books at the desk, and while the man was stamping the
cards, Martin blurted out:-

“Say, there’s something I’d like to ask you.”

The man smiled and paid attention.

“When you meet a young lady an’ she asks you to call, how soon can you
call?”

Martin felt his shirt press and cling to his shoulders, what of the
sweat of the effort.

“Why I’d say any time,” the man answered.

“Yes, but this is different,” Martin objected. “She—I—well, you see,
it’s this way: maybe she won’t be there. She goes to the university.”

“Then call again.”

“What I said ain’t what I meant,” Martin confessed falteringly, while
he made up his mind to throw himself wholly upon the other’s mercy.
“I’m just a rough sort of a fellow, an’ I ain’t never seen anything of
society. This girl is all that I ain’t, an’ I ain’t anything that she
is. You don’t think I’m playin’ the fool, do you?” he demanded
abruptly.

“No, no; not at all, I assure you,” the other protested. “Your request
is not exactly in the scope of the reference department, but I shall be
only too pleased to assist you.”

Martin looked at him admiringly.

“If I could tear it off that way, I’d be all right,” he said.

“I beg pardon?”

“I mean if I could talk easy that way, an’ polite, an’ all the rest.”

“Oh,” said the other, with comprehension.

“What is the best time to call? The afternoon?—not too close to
meal-time? Or the evening? Or Sunday?”

“I’ll tell you,” the librarian said with a brightening face. “You call
her up on the telephone and find out.”

“I’ll do it,” he said, picking up his books and starting away.

He turned back and asked:-

“When you’re speakin’ to a young lady—say, for instance, Miss Lizzie
Smith—do you say ‘Miss Lizzie’? or ‘Miss Smith’?”

“Say ‘Miss Smith,’” the librarian stated authoritatively. “Say ‘Miss
Smith’ always—until you come to know her better.”

So it was that Martin Eden solved the problem.

“Come down any time; I’ll be at home all afternoon,” was Ruth’s reply
over the telephone to his stammered request as to when he could return
the borrowed books.

She met him at the door herself, and her woman’s eyes took in
immediately the creased trousers and the certain slight but indefinable
change in him for the better. Also, she was struck by his face. It was
almost violent, this health of his, and it seemed to rush out of him
and at her in waves of force. She felt the urge again of the desire to
lean toward him for warmth, and marvelled again at the effect his
presence produced upon her. And he, in turn, knew again the swimming
sensation of bliss when he felt the contact of her hand in greeting.
The difference between them lay in that she was cool and self-possessed
while his face flushed to the roots of the hair. He stumbled with his
old awkwardness after her, and his shoulders swung and lurched
perilously.

Once they were seated in the living-room, he began to get on
easily—more easily by far than he had expected. She made it easy for
him; and the gracious spirit with which she did it made him love her
more madly than ever. They talked first of the borrowed books, of the
Swinburne he was devoted to, and of the Browning he did not understand;
and she led the conversation on from subject to subject, while she
pondered the problem of how she could be of help to him. She had
thought of this often since their first meeting. She wanted to help
him. He made a call upon her pity and tenderness that no one had ever
made before, and the pity was not so much derogatory of him as maternal
in her. Her pity could not be of the common sort, when the man who drew
it was so much man as to shock her with maidenly fears and set her mind
and pulse thrilling with strange thoughts and feelings. The old
fascination of his neck was there, and there was sweetness in the
thought of laying her hands upon it. It seemed still a wanton impulse,
but she had grown more used to it. She did not dream that in such guise
new-born love would epitomize itself. Nor did she dream that the
feeling he excited in her was love. She thought she was merely
interested in him as an unusual type possessing various potential
excellencies, and she even felt philanthropic about it.

She did not know she desired him; but with him it was different. He
knew that he loved her, and he desired her as he had never before
desired anything in his life. He had loved poetry for beauty’s sake;
but since he met her the gates to the vast field of love-poetry had
been opened wide. She had given him understanding even more than
Bulfinch and Gayley. There was a line that a week before he would not
have favored with a second thought—“God’s own mad lover dying on a
kiss”; but now it was ever insistent in his mind. He marvelled at the
wonder of it and the truth; and as he gazed upon her he knew that he
could die gladly upon a kiss. He felt himself God’s own mad lover, and
no accolade of knighthood could have given him greater pride. And at
last he knew the meaning of life and why he had been born.

As he gazed at her and listened, his thoughts grew daring. He reviewed
all the wild delight of the pressure of her hand in his at the door,
and longed for it again. His gaze wandered often toward her lips, and
he yearned for them hungrily. But there was nothing gross or earthly
about this yearning. It gave him exquisite delight to watch every
movement and play of those lips as they enunciated the words she spoke;
yet they were not ordinary lips such as all men and women had. Their
substance was not mere human clay. They were lips of pure spirit, and
his desire for them seemed absolutely different from the desire that
had led him to other women’s lips. He could kiss her lips, rest his own
physical lips upon them, but it would be with the lofty and awful
fervor with which one would kiss the robe of God. He was not conscious
of this transvaluation of values that had taken place in him, and was
unaware that the light that shone in his eyes when he looked at her was
quite the same light that shines in all men’s eyes when the desire of
love is upon them. He did not dream how ardent and masculine his gaze
was, nor that the warm flame of it was affecting the alchemy of her
spirit. Her penetrative virginity exalted and disguised his own
emotions, elevating his thoughts to a star-cool chastity, and he would
have been startled to learn that there was that shining out of his
eyes, like warm waves, that flowed through her and kindled a kindred
warmth. She was subtly perturbed by it, and more than once, though she
knew not why, it disrupted her train of thought with its delicious
intrusion and compelled her to grope for the remainder of ideas partly
uttered. Speech was always easy with her, and these interruptions would
have puzzled her had she not decided that it was because he was a
remarkable type. She was very sensitive to impressions, and it was not
strange, after all, that this aura of a traveller from another world
should so affect her.

The problem in the background of her consciousness was how to help him,
and she turned the conversation in that direction; but it was Martin
who came to the point first.

“I wonder if I can get some advice from you,” he began, and received an
acquiescence of willingness that made his heart bound. “You remember
the other time I was here I said I couldn’t talk about books an’ things
because I didn’t know how? Well, I’ve ben doin’ a lot of thinkin’ ever
since. I’ve ben to the library a whole lot, but most of the books I’ve
tackled have ben over my head. Mebbe I’d better begin at the beginnin’.
I ain’t never had no advantages. I’ve worked pretty hard ever since I
was a kid, an’ since I’ve ben to the library, lookin’ with new eyes at
books—an’ lookin’ at new books, too—I’ve just about concluded that I
ain’t ben reading the right kind. You know the books you find in
cattle-camps an’ fo’c’s’ls ain’t the same you’ve got in this house, for
instance. Well, that’s the sort of readin’ matter I’ve ben accustomed
to. And yet—an’ I ain’t just makin’ a brag of it—I’ve ben different
from the people I’ve herded with. Not that I’m any better than the
sailors an’ cow-punchers I travelled with,—I was cow-punchin’ for a
short time, you know,—but I always liked books, read everything I could
lay hands on, an’—well, I guess I think differently from most of ’em.

“Now, to come to what I’m drivin’ at. I was never inside a house like
this. When I come a week ago, an’ saw all this, an’ you, an’ your
mother, an’ brothers, an’ everything—well, I liked it. I’d heard about
such things an’ read about such things in some of the books, an’ when I
looked around at your house, why, the books come true. But the thing
I’m after is I liked it. I wanted it. I want it now. I want to breathe
air like you get in this house—air that is filled with books, and
pictures, and beautiful things, where people talk in low voices an’ are
clean, an’ their thoughts are clean. The air I always breathed was
mixed up with grub an’ house-rent an’ scrappin’ an booze an’ that’s all
they talked about, too. Why, when you was crossin’ the room to kiss
your mother, I thought it was the most beautiful thing I ever seen.
I’ve seen a whole lot of life, an’ somehow I’ve seen a whole lot more
of it than most of them that was with me. I like to see, an’ I want to
see more, an’ I want to see it different.

“But I ain’t got to the point yet. Here it is. I want to make my way to
the kind of life you have in this house. There’s more in life than
booze, an’ hard work, an’ knockin’ about. Now, how am I goin’ to get
it? Where do I take hold an’ begin? I’m willin’ to work my passage, you
know, an’ I can make most men sick when it comes to hard work. Once I
get started, I’ll work night an’ day. Mebbe you think it’s funny, me
askin’ you about all this. I know you’re the last person in the world I
ought to ask, but I don’t know anybody else I could ask—unless it’s
Arthur. Mebbe I ought to ask him. If I was—”

His voice died away. His firmly planned intention had come to a halt on
the verge of the horrible probability that he should have asked Arthur
and that he had made a fool of himself. Ruth did not speak immediately.
She was too absorbed in striving to reconcile the stumbling, uncouth
speech and its simplicity of thought with what she saw in his face. She
had never looked in eyes that expressed greater power. Here was a man
who could do anything, was the message she read there, and it accorded
ill with the weakness of his spoken thought. And for that matter so
complex and quick was her own mind that she did not have a just
appreciation of simplicity. And yet she had caught an impression of
power in the very groping of this mind. It had seemed to her like a
giant writhing and straining at the bonds that held him down. Her face
was all sympathy when she did speak.

“What you need, you realize yourself, and it is education. You should
go back and finish grammar school, and then go through to high school
and university.”

“But that takes money,” he interrupted.

“Oh!” she cried. “I had not thought of that. But then you have
relatives, somebody who could assist you?”

He shook his head.

“My father and mother are dead. I’ve two sisters, one married, an’ the
other’ll get married soon, I suppose. Then I’ve a string of
brothers,—I’m the youngest,—but they never helped nobody. They’ve just
knocked around over the world, lookin’ out for number one. The oldest
died in India. Two are in South Africa now, an’ another’s on a whaling
voyage, an’ one’s travellin’ with a circus—he does trapeze work. An’ I
guess I’m just like them. I’ve taken care of myself since I was
eleven—that’s when my mother died. I’ve got to study by myself, I
guess, an’ what I want to know is where to begin.”

“I should say the first thing of all would be to get a grammar. Your
grammar is—” She had intended saying “awful,” but she amended it to “is
not particularly good.”

He flushed and sweated.

“I know I must talk a lot of slang an’ words you don’t understand. But
then they’re the only words I know—how to speak. I’ve got other words
in my mind, picked ’em up from books, but I can’t pronounce ’em, so I
don’t use ’em.”

“It isn’t what you say, so much as how you say it. You don’t mind my
being frank, do you? I don’t want to hurt you.”

“No, no,” he cried, while he secretly blessed her for her kindness.
“Fire away. I’ve got to know, an’ I’d sooner know from you than anybody
else.”

“Well, then, you say, ‘You was’; it should be, ‘You were.’ You say ‘I
seen’ for ‘I saw.’ You use the double negative—”

“What’s the double negative?” he demanded; then added humbly, “You see,
I don’t even understand your explanations.”

“I’m afraid I didn’t explain that,” she smiled. “A double negative
is—let me see—well, you say, ‘never helped nobody.’ ‘Never’ is a
negative. ‘Nobody’ is another negative. It is a rule that two negatives
make a positive. ‘Never helped nobody’ means that, not helping nobody,
they must have helped somebody.”

“That’s pretty clear,” he said. “I never thought of it before. But it
don’t mean they _must_ have helped somebody, does it? Seems to me that
‘never helped nobody’ just naturally fails to say whether or not they
helped somebody. I never thought of it before, and I’ll never say it
again.”

She was pleased and surprised with the quickness and surety of his
mind. As soon as he had got the clew he not only understood but
corrected her error.

“You’ll find it all in the grammar,” she went on. “There’s something
else I noticed in your speech. You say ‘don’t’ when you shouldn’t.
‘Don’t’ is a contraction and stands for two words. Do you know them?”

He thought a moment, then answered, “‘Do not.’”

She nodded her head, and said, “And you use ‘don’t’ when you mean ‘does
not.’”

He was puzzled over this, and did not get it so quickly.

“Give me an illustration,” he asked.

“Well—” She puckered her brows and pursed up her mouth as she thought,
while he looked on and decided that her expression was most adorable.
“‘It don’t do to be hasty.’ Change ‘don’t’ to ‘do not,’ and it reads,
‘It do not do to be hasty,’ which is perfectly absurd.”

He turned it over in his mind and considered.

“Doesn’t it jar on your ear?” she suggested.

“Can’t say that it does,” he replied judicially.

“Why didn’t you say, ‘Can’t say that it do’?” she queried.

“That sounds wrong,” he said slowly. “As for the other I can’t make up
my mind. I guess my ear ain’t had the trainin’ yours has.”

“There is no such word as ‘ain’t,’” she said, prettily emphatic.

Martin flushed again.

“And you say ‘ben’ for ‘been,’” she continued; “‘come’ for ‘came’; and
the way you chop your endings is something dreadful.”

“How do you mean?” He leaned forward, feeling that he ought to get down
on his knees before so marvellous a mind. “How do I chop?”

“You don’t complete the endings. ‘A-n-d’ spells ‘and.’ You pronounce it
‘an’.’ ‘I-n-g’ spells ‘ing.’ Sometimes you pronounce it ‘ing’ and
sometimes you leave off the ‘g.’ And then you slur by dropping initial
letters and diphthongs. ‘T-h-e-m’ spells ‘them.’ You pronounce it—oh,
well, it is not necessary to go over all of them. What you need is the
grammar. I’ll get one and show you how to begin.”

As she arose, there shot through his mind something that he had read in
the etiquette books, and he stood up awkwardly, worrying as to whether
he was doing the right thing, and fearing that she might take it as a
sign that he was about to go.

“By the way, Mr. Eden,” she called back, as she was leaving the room.
“What is _booze_? You used it several times, you know.”

“Oh, booze,” he laughed. “It’s slang. It means whiskey an’
beer—anything that will make you drunk.”

“And another thing,” she laughed back. “Don’t use ‘you’ when you are
impersonal. ‘You’ is very personal, and your use of it just now was not
precisely what you meant.”

“I don’t just see that.”

“Why, you said just now, to me, ‘whiskey and beer—anything that will
make you drunk’—make me drunk, don’t you see?”

“Well, it would, wouldn’t it?”

“Yes, of course,” she smiled. “But it would be nicer not to bring me
into it. Substitute ‘one’ for ‘you’ and see how much better it sounds.”

When she returned with the grammar, she drew a chair near his—he
wondered if he should have helped her with the chair—and sat down
beside him. She turned the pages of the grammar, and their heads were
inclined toward each other. He could hardly follow her outlining of the
work he must do, so amazed was he by her delightful propinquity. But
when she began to lay down the importance of conjugation, he forgot all
about her. He had never heard of conjugation, and was fascinated by the
glimpse he was catching into the tie-ribs of language. He leaned closer
to the page, and her hair touched his cheek. He had fainted but once in
his life, and he thought he was going to faint again. He could scarcely
breathe, and his heart was pounding the blood up into his throat and
suffocating him. Never had she seemed so accessible as now. For the
moment the great gulf that separated them was bridged. But there was no
diminution in the loftiness of his feeling for her. She had not
descended to him. It was he who had been caught up into the clouds and
carried to her. His reverence for her, in that moment, was of the same
order as religious awe and fervor. It seemed to him that he had
intruded upon the holy of holies, and slowly and carefully he moved his
head aside from the contact which thrilled him like an electric shock
and of which she had not been aware.




CHAPTER VIII.


Several weeks went by, during which Martin Eden studied his grammar,
reviewed the books on etiquette, and read voraciously the books that
caught his fancy. Of his own class he saw nothing. The girls of the
Lotus Club wondered what had become of him and worried Jim with
questions, and some of the fellows who put on the glove at Riley’s were
glad that Martin came no more. He made another discovery of
treasure-trove in the library. As the grammar had shown him the
tie-ribs of language, so that book showed him the tie-ribs of poetry,
and he began to learn metre and construction and form, beneath the
beauty he loved finding the why and wherefore of that beauty. Another
modern book he found treated poetry as a representative art, treated it
exhaustively, with copious illustrations from the best in literature.
Never had he read fiction with so keen zest as he studied these books.
And his fresh mind, untaxed for twenty years and impelled by maturity
of desire, gripped hold of what he read with a virility unusual to the
student mind.

When he looked back now from his vantage-ground, the old world he had
known, the world of land and sea and ships, of sailor-men and
harpy-women, seemed a very small world; and yet it blended in with this
new world and expanded. His mind made for unity, and he was surprised
when at first he began to see points of contact between the two worlds.
And he was ennobled, as well, by the loftiness of thought and beauty he
found in the books. This led him to believe more firmly than ever that
up above him, in society like Ruth and her family, all men and women
thought these thoughts and lived them. Down below where he lived was
the ignoble, and he wanted to purge himself of the ignoble that had
soiled all his days, and to rise to that sublimated realm where dwelt
the upper classes. All his childhood and youth had been troubled by a
vague unrest; he had never known what he wanted, but he had wanted
something that he had hunted vainly for until he met Ruth. And now his
unrest had become sharp and painful, and he knew at last, clearly and
definitely, that it was beauty, and intellect, and love that he must
have.

During those several weeks he saw Ruth half a dozen times, and each
time was an added inspiration. She helped him with his English,
corrected his pronunciation, and started him on arithmetic. But their
intercourse was not all devoted to elementary study. He had seen too
much of life, and his mind was too matured, to be wholly content with
fractions, cube root, parsing, and analysis; and there were times when
their conversation turned on other themes—the last poetry he had read,
the latest poet she had studied. And when she read aloud to him her
favorite passages, he ascended to the topmost heaven of delight. Never,
in all the women he had heard speak, had he heard a voice like hers.
The least sound of it was a stimulus to his love, and he thrilled and
throbbed with every word she uttered. It was the quality of it, the
repose, and the musical modulation—the soft, rich, indefinable product
of culture and a gentle soul. As he listened to her, there rang in the
ears of his memory the harsh cries of barbarian women and of hags, and,
in lesser degrees of harshness, the strident voices of working women
and of the girls of his own class. Then the chemistry of vision would
begin to work, and they would troop in review across his mind, each, by
contrast, multiplying Ruth’s glories. Then, too, his bliss was
heightened by the knowledge that her mind was comprehending what she
read and was quivering with appreciation of the beauty of the written
thought. She read to him much from “The Princess,” and often he saw her
eyes swimming with tears, so finely was her aesthetic nature strung. At
such moments her own emotions elevated him till he was as a god, and,
as he gazed at her and listened, he seemed gazing on the face of life
and reading its deepest secrets. And then, becoming aware of the
heights of exquisite sensibility he attained, he decided that this was
love and that love was the greatest thing in the world. And in review
would pass along the corridors of memory all previous thrills and
burnings he had known,—the drunkenness of wine, the caresses of women,
the rough play and give and take of physical contests,—and they seemed
trivial and mean compared with this sublime ardor he now enjoyed.

The situation was obscured to Ruth. She had never had any experiences
of the heart. Her only experiences in such matters were of the books,
where the facts of ordinary day were translated by fancy into a fairy
realm of unreality; and she little knew that this rough sailor was
creeping into her heart and storing there pent forces that would some
day burst forth and surge through her in waves of fire. She did not
know the actual fire of love. Her knowledge of love was purely
theoretical, and she conceived of it as lambent flame, gentle as the
fall of dew or the ripple of quiet water, and cool as the velvet-dark
of summer nights. Her idea of love was more that of placid affection,
serving the loved one softly in an atmosphere, flower-scented and
dim-lighted, of ethereal calm. She did not dream of the volcanic
convulsions of love, its scorching heat and sterile wastes of parched
ashes. She knew neither her own potencies, nor the potencies of the
world; and the deeps of life were to her seas of illusion. The conjugal
affection of her father and mother constituted her ideal of
love-affinity, and she looked forward some day to emerging, without
shock or friction, into that same quiet sweetness of existence with a
loved one.

So it was that she looked upon Martin Eden as a novelty, a strange
individual, and she identified with novelty and strangeness the effects
he produced upon her. It was only natural. In similar ways she had
experienced unusual feelings when she looked at wild animals in the
menagerie, or when she witnessed a storm of wind, or shuddered at the
bright-ribbed lightning. There was something cosmic in such things, and
there was something cosmic in him. He came to her breathing of large
airs and great spaces. The blaze of tropic suns was in his face, and in
his swelling, resilient muscles was the primordial vigor of life. He
was marred and scarred by that mysterious world of rough men and
rougher deeds, the outposts of which began beyond her horizon. He was
untamed, wild, and in secret ways her vanity was touched by the fact
that he came so mildly to her hand. Likewise she was stirred by the
common impulse to tame the wild thing. It was an unconscious impulse,
and farthest from her thoughts that her desire was to re-thumb the clay
of him into a likeness of her father’s image, which image she believed
to be the finest in the world. Nor was there any way, out of her
inexperience, for her to know that the cosmic feel she caught of him
was that most cosmic of things, love, which with equal power drew men
and women together across the world, compelled stags to kill each other
in the rutting season, and drove even the elements irresistibly to
unite.

His swift development was a source of surprise and interest. She
detected unguessed finenesses in him that seemed to bud, day by day,
like flowers in congenial soil. She read Browning aloud to him, and was
often puzzled by the strange interpretations he gave to mooted
passages. It was beyond her to realize that, out of his experience of
men and women and life, his interpretations were far more frequently
correct than hers. His conceptions seemed naive to her, though she was
often fired by his daring flights of comprehension, whose orbit-path
was so wide among the stars that she could not follow and could only
sit and thrill to the impact of unguessed power. Then she played to
him—no longer at him—and probed him with music that sank to depths
beyond her plumb-line. His nature opened to music as a flower to the
sun, and the transition was quick from his working-class rag-time and
jingles to her classical display pieces that she knew nearly by heart.
Yet he betrayed a democratic fondness for Wagner, and the “Tannhäuser”
overture, when she had given him the clew to it, claimed him as nothing
else she played. In an immediate way it personified his life. All his
past was the _Venusburg_ motif, while her he identified somehow with
the _Pilgrim’s Chorus_ motif; and from the exalted state this elevated
him to, he swept onward and upward into that vast shadow-realm of
spirit-groping, where good and evil war eternally.

Sometimes he questioned, and induced in her mind temporary doubts as to
the correctness of her own definitions and conceptions of music. But
her singing he did not question. It was too wholly her, and he sat
always amazed at the divine melody of her pure soprano voice. And he
could not help but contrast it with the weak pipings and shrill
quaverings of factory girls, ill-nourished and untrained, and with the
raucous shriekings from gin-cracked throats of the women of the seaport
towns. She enjoyed singing and playing to him. In truth, it was the
first time she had ever had a human soul to play with, and the plastic
clay of him was a delight to mould; for she thought she was moulding
it, and her intentions were good. Besides, it was pleasant to be with
him. He did not repel her. That first repulsion had been really a fear
of her undiscovered self, and the fear had gone to sleep. Though she
did not know it, she had a feeling in him of proprietary right. Also,
he had a tonic effect upon her. She was studying hard at the
university, and it seemed to strengthen her to emerge from the dusty
books and have the fresh sea-breeze of his personality blow upon her.
Strength! Strength was what she needed, and he gave it to her in
generous measure. To come into the same room with him, or to meet him
at the door, was to take heart of life. And when he had gone, she would
return to her books with a keener zest and fresh store of energy.

She knew her Browning, but it had never sunk into her that it was an
awkward thing to play with souls. As her interest in Martin increased,
the remodelling of his life became a passion with her.

“There is Mr. Butler,” she said one afternoon, when grammar and
arithmetic and poetry had been put aside.

“He had comparatively no advantages at first. His father had been a
bank cashier, but he lingered for years, dying of consumption in
Arizona, so that when he was dead, Mr. Butler, Charles Butler he was
called, found himself alone in the world. His father had come from
Australia, you know, and so he had no relatives in California. He went
to work in a printing-office,—I have heard him tell of it many
times,—and he got three dollars a week, at first. His income to-day is
at least thirty thousand a year. How did he do it? He was honest, and
faithful, and industrious, and economical. He denied himself the
enjoyments that most boys indulge in. He made it a point to save so
much every week, no matter what he had to do without in order to save
it. Of course, he was soon earning more than three dollars a week, and
as his wages increased he saved more and more.

“He worked in the daytime, and at night he went to night school. He had
his eyes fixed always on the future. Later on he went to night high
school. When he was only seventeen, he was earning excellent wages at
setting type, but he was ambitious. He wanted a career, not a
livelihood, and he was content to make immediate sacrifices for his
ultimate gain. He decided upon the law, and he entered father’s office
as an office boy—think of that!—and got only four dollars a week. But
he had learned how to be economical, and out of that four dollars he
went on saving money.”

She paused for breath, and to note how Martin was receiving it. His
face was lighted up with interest in the youthful struggles of Mr.
Butler; but there was a frown upon his face as well.

“I’d say they was pretty hard lines for a young fellow,” he remarked.
“Four dollars a week! How could he live on it? You can bet he didn’t
have any frills. Why, I pay five dollars a week for board now, an’
there’s nothin’ excitin’ about it, you can lay to that. He must have
lived like a dog. The food he ate—”

“He cooked for himself,” she interrupted, “on a little kerosene stove.”

“The food he ate must have been worse than what a sailor gets on the
worst-feedin’ deep-water ships, than which there ain’t much that can be
possibly worse.”

“But think of him now!” she cried enthusiastically. “Think of what his
income affords him. His early denials are paid for a thousand-fold.”

Martin looked at her sharply.

“There’s one thing I’ll bet you,” he said, “and it is that Mr. Butler
is nothin’ gay-hearted now in his fat days. He fed himself like that
for years an’ years, on a boy’s stomach, an’ I bet his stomach’s none
too good now for it.”

Her eyes dropped before his searching gaze.

“I’ll bet he’s got dyspepsia right now!” Martin challenged.

“Yes, he has,” she confessed; “but—”

“An’ I bet,” Martin dashed on, “that he’s solemn an’ serious as an old
owl, an’ doesn’t care a rap for a good time, for all his thirty
thousand a year. An’ I’ll bet he’s not particularly joyful at seein’
others have a good time. Ain’t I right?”

She nodded her head in agreement, and hastened to explain:-

“But he is not that type of man. By nature he is sober and serious. He
always was that.”

“You can bet he was,” Martin proclaimed. “Three dollars a week, an’
four dollars a week, an’ a young boy cookin’ for himself on an
oil-burner an’ layin’ up money, workin’ all day an’ studyin’ all night,
just workin’ an’ never playin’, never havin’ a good time, an’ never
learnin’ how to have a good time—of course his thirty thousand came
along too late.”

His sympathetic imagination was flashing upon his inner sight all the
thousands of details of the boy’s existence and of his narrow spiritual
development into a thirty-thousand-dollar-a-year man. With the
swiftness and wide-reaching of multitudinous thought Charles Butler’s
whole life was telescoped upon his vision.

“Do you know,” he added, “I feel sorry for Mr. Butler. He was too young
to know better, but he robbed himself of life for the sake of thirty
thousand a year that’s clean wasted upon him. Why, thirty thousand,
lump sum, wouldn’t buy for him right now what ten cents he was layin’
up would have bought him, when he was a kid, in the way of candy an’
peanuts or a seat in nigger heaven.”

It was just such uniqueness of points of view that startled Ruth. Not
only were they new to her, and contrary to her own beliefs, but she
always felt in them germs of truth that threatened to unseat or modify
her own convictions. Had she been fourteen instead of twenty-four, she
might have been changed by them; but she was twenty-four, conservative
by nature and upbringing, and already crystallized into the cranny of
life where she had been born and formed. It was true, his bizarre
judgments troubled her in the moments they were uttered, but she
ascribed them to his novelty of type and strangeness of living, and
they were soon forgotten. Nevertheless, while she disapproved of them,
the strength of their utterance, and the flashing of eyes and
earnestness of face that accompanied them, always thrilled her and drew
her toward him. She would never have guessed that this man who had come
from beyond her horizon, was, in such moments, flashing on beyond her
horizon with wider and deeper concepts. Her own limits were the limits
of her horizon; but limited minds can recognize limitations only in
others. And so she felt that her outlook was very wide indeed, and that
where his conflicted with hers marked his limitations; and she dreamed
of helping him to see as she saw, of widening his horizon until it was
identified with hers.

“But I have not finished my story,” she said. “He worked, so father
says, as no other office boy he ever had. Mr. Butler was always eager
to work. He never was late, and he was usually at the office a few
minutes before his regular time. And yet he saved his time. Every spare
moment was devoted to study. He studied book-keeping and type-writing,
and he paid for lessons in shorthand by dictating at night to a court
reporter who needed practice. He quickly became a clerk, and he made
himself invaluable. Father appreciated him and saw that he was bound to
rise. It was on father’s suggestion that he went to law college. He
became a lawyer, and hardly was he back in the office when father took
him in as junior partner. He is a great man. He refused the United
States Senate several times, and father says he could become a justice
of the Supreme Court any time a vacancy occurs, if he wants to. Such a
life is an inspiration to all of us. It shows us that a man with will
may rise superior to his environment.”

“He is a great man,” Martin said sincerely.

But it seemed to him there was something in the recital that jarred
upon his sense of beauty and life. He could not find an adequate motive
in Mr. Butler’s life of pinching and privation. Had he done it for love
of a woman, or for attainment of beauty, Martin would have understood.
God’s own mad lover should do anything for the kiss, but not for thirty
thousand dollars a year. He was dissatisfied with Mr. Butler’s career.
There was something paltry about it, after all. Thirty thousand a year
was all right, but dyspepsia and inability to be humanly happy robbed
such princely income of all its value.

Much of this he strove to express to Ruth, and shocked her and made it
clear that more remodelling was necessary. Hers was that common
insularity of mind that makes human creatures believe that their color,
creed, and politics are best and right and that other human creatures
scattered over the world are less fortunately placed than they. It was
the same insularity of mind that made the ancient Jew thank God he was
not born a woman, and sent the modern missionary god-substituting to
the ends of the earth; and it made Ruth desire to shape this man from
other crannies of life into the likeness of the men who lived in her
particular cranny of life.




CHAPTER IX.


Back from sea Martin Eden came, homing for California with a lover’s
desire. His store of money exhausted, he had shipped before the mast on
the treasure-hunting schooner; and the Solomon Islands, after eight
months of failure to find treasure, had witnessed the breaking up of
the expedition. The men had been paid off in Australia, and Martin had
immediately shipped on a deep-water vessel for San Francisco. Not alone
had those eight months earned him enough money to stay on land for many
weeks, but they had enabled him to do a great deal of studying and
reading.

His was the student’s mind, and behind his ability to learn was the
indomitability of his nature and his love for Ruth. The grammar he had
taken along he went through again and again until his unjaded brain had
mastered it. He noticed the bad grammar used by his shipmates, and made
a point of mentally correcting and reconstructing their crudities of
speech. To his great joy he discovered that his ear was becoming
sensitive and that he was developing grammatical nerves. A double
negative jarred him like a discord, and often, from lack of practice,
it was from his own lips that the jar came. His tongue refused to learn
new tricks in a day.

After he had been through the grammar repeatedly, he took up the
dictionary and added twenty words a day to his vocabulary. He found
that this was no light task, and at wheel or lookout he steadily went
over and over his lengthening list of pronunciations and definitions,
while he invariably memorized himself to sleep. “Never did anything,”
“if I were,” and “those things,” were phrases, with many variations,
that he repeated under his breath in order to accustom his tongue to
the language spoken by Ruth. “And” and “ing,” with the “d” and “g”
pronounced emphatically, he went over thousands of times; and to his
surprise he noticed that he was beginning to speak cleaner and more
correct English than the officers themselves and the
gentleman-adventurers in the cabin who had financed the expedition.

The captain was a fishy-eyed Norwegian who somehow had fallen into
possession of a complete Shakespeare, which he never read, and Martin
had washed his clothes for him and in return been permitted access to
the precious volumes. For a time, so steeped was he in the plays and in
the many favorite passages that impressed themselves almost without
effort on his brain, that all the world seemed to shape itself into
forms of Elizabethan tragedy or comedy and his very thoughts were in
blank verse. It trained his ear and gave him a fine appreciation for
noble English; withal it introduced into his mind much that was archaic
and obsolete.

The eight months had been well spent, and, in addition to what he had
learned of right speaking and high thinking, he had learned much of
himself. Along with his humbleness because he knew so little, there
arose a conviction of power. He felt a sharp gradation between himself
and his shipmates, and was wise enough to realize that the difference
lay in potentiality rather than achievement. What he could do,—they
could do; but within him he felt a confused ferment working that told
him there was more in him than he had done. He was tortured by the
exquisite beauty of the world, and wished that Ruth were there to share
it with him. He decided that he would describe to her many of the bits
of South Sea beauty. The creative spirit in him flamed up at the
thought and urged that he recreate this beauty for a wider audience
than Ruth. And then, in splendor and glory, came the great idea. He
would write. He would be one of the eyes through which the world saw,
one of the ears through which it heard, one of the hearts through which
it felt. He would write—everything—poetry and prose, fiction and
description, and plays like Shakespeare. There was career and the way
to win to Ruth. The men of literature were the world’s giants, and he
conceived them to be far finer than the Mr. Butlers who earned thirty
thousand a year and could be Supreme Court justices if they wanted to.

Once the idea had germinated, it mastered him, and the return voyage to
San Francisco was like a dream. He was drunken with unguessed power and
felt that he could do anything. In the midst of the great and lonely
sea he gained perspective. Clearly, and for the first time, he saw Ruth
and her world. It was all visualized in his mind as a concrete thing
which he could take up in his two hands and turn around and about and
examine. There was much that was dim and nebulous in that world, but he
saw it as a whole and not in detail, and he saw, also, the way to
master it. To write! The thought was fire in him. He would begin as
soon as he got back. The first thing he would do would be to describe
the voyage of the treasure-hunters. He would sell it to some San
Francisco newspaper. He would not tell Ruth anything about it, and she
would be surprised and pleased when she saw his name in print. While he
wrote, he could go on studying. There were twenty-four hours in each
day. He was invincible. He knew how to work, and the citadels would go
down before him. He would not have to go to sea again—as a sailor; and
for the instant he caught a vision of a steam yacht. There were other
writers who possessed steam yachts. Of course, he cautioned himself, it
would be slow succeeding at first, and for a time he would be content
to earn enough money by his writing to enable him to go on studying.
And then, after some time,—a very indeterminate time,—when he had
learned and prepared himself, he would write the great things and his
name would be on all men’s lips. But greater than that, infinitely
greater and greatest of all, he would have proved himself worthy of
Ruth. Fame was all very well, but it was for Ruth that his splendid
dream arose. He was not a fame-monger, but merely one of God’s mad
lovers.

Arrived in Oakland, with his snug pay-day in his pocket, he took up his
old room at Bernard Higginbotham’s and set to work. He did not even let
Ruth know he was back. He would go and see her when he finished the
article on the treasure-hunters. It was not so difficult to abstain
from seeing her, because of the violent heat of creative fever that
burned in him. Besides, the very article he was writing would bring her
nearer to him. He did not know how long an article he should write, but
he counted the words in a double-page article in the Sunday supplement
of the _San Francisco Examiner_, and guided himself by that. Three
days, at white heat, completed his narrative; but when he had copied it
carefully, in a large scrawl that was easy to read, he learned from a
rhetoric he picked up in the library that there were such things as
paragraphs and quotation marks. He had never thought of such things
before; and he promptly set to work writing the article over, referring
continually to the pages of the rhetoric and learning more in a day
about composition than the average schoolboy in a year. When he had
copied the article a second time and rolled it up carefully, he read in
a newspaper an item on hints to beginners, and discovered the iron law
that manuscripts should never be rolled and that they should be written
on one side of the paper. He had violated the law on both counts. Also,
he learned from the item that first-class papers paid a minimum of ten
dollars a column. So, while he copied the manuscript a third time, he
consoled himself by multiplying ten columns by ten dollars. The product
was always the same, one hundred dollars, and he decided that that was
better than seafaring. If it hadn’t been for his blunders, he would
have finished the article in three days. One hundred dollars in three
days! It would have taken him three months and longer on the sea to
earn a similar amount. A man was a fool to go to sea when he could
write, he concluded, though the money in itself meant nothing to him.
Its value was in the liberty it would get him, the presentable garments
it would buy him, all of which would bring him nearer, swiftly nearer,
to the slender, pale girl who had turned his life back upon itself and
given him inspiration.

He mailed the manuscript in a flat envelope, and addressed it to the
editor of the _San Francisco Examiner_. He had an idea that anything
accepted by a paper was published immediately, and as he had sent the
manuscript in on Friday he expected it to come out on the following
Sunday. He conceived that it would be fine to let that event apprise
Ruth of his return. Then, Sunday afternoon, he would call and see her.
In the meantime he was occupied by another idea, which he prided
himself upon as being a particularly sane, careful, and modest idea. He
would write an adventure story for boys and sell it to _The Youth’s
Companion_. He went to the free reading-room and looked through the
files of _The Youth’s Companion_. Serial stories, he found, were
usually published in that weekly in five instalments of about three
thousand words each. He discovered several serials that ran to seven
instalments, and decided to write one of that length.

He had been on a whaling voyage in the Arctic, once—a voyage that was
to have been for three years and which had terminated in shipwreck at
the end of six months. While his imagination was fanciful, even
fantastic at times, he had a basic love of reality that compelled him
to write about the things he knew. He knew whaling, and out of the real
materials of his knowledge he proceeded to manufacture the fictitious
adventures of the two boys he intended to use as joint heroes. It was
easy work, he decided on Saturday evening. He had completed on that day
the first instalment of three thousand words—much to the amusement of
Jim, and to the open derision of Mr. Higginbotham, who sneered
throughout meal-time at the “litery” person they had discovered in the
family.

Martin contented himself by picturing his brother-in-law’s surprise on
Sunday morning when he opened his _Examiner_ and saw the article on the
treasure-hunters. Early that morning he was out himself to the front
door, nervously racing through the many-sheeted newspaper. He went
through it a second time, very carefully, then folded it up and left it
where he had found it. He was glad he had not told any one about his
article. On second thought he concluded that he had been wrong about
the speed with which things found their way into newspaper columns.
Besides, there had not been any news value in his article, and most
likely the editor would write to him about it first.

After breakfast he went on with his serial. The words flowed from his
pen, though he broke off from the writing frequently to look up
definitions in the dictionary or to refer to the rhetoric. He often
read or re-read a chapter at a time, during such pauses; and he
consoled himself that while he was not writing the great things he felt
to be in him, he was learning composition, at any rate, and training
himself to shape up and express his thoughts. He toiled on till dark,
when he went out to the reading-room and explored magazines and
weeklies until the place closed at ten o’clock. This was his programme
for a week. Each day he did three thousand words, and each evening he
puzzled his way through the magazines, taking note of the stories,
articles, and poems that editors saw fit to publish. One thing was
certain: What these multitudinous writers did he could do, and only
give him time and he would do what they could not do. He was cheered to
read in _Book News_, in a paragraph on the payment of magazine writers,
not that Rudyard Kipling received a dollar per word, but that the
minimum rate paid by first-class magazines was two cents a word. _The
Youth’s Companion_ was certainly first class, and at that rate the
three thousand words he had written that day would bring him sixty
dollars—two months’ wages on the sea!

On Friday night he finished the serial, twenty-one thousand words long.
At two cents a word, he calculated, that would bring him four hundred
and twenty dollars. Not a bad week’s work. It was more money than he
had ever possessed at one time. He did not know how he could spend it
all. He had tapped a gold mine. Where this came from he could always
get more. He planned to buy some more clothes, to subscribe to many
magazines, and to buy dozens of reference books that at present he was
compelled to go to the library to consult. And still there was a large
portion of the four hundred and twenty dollars unspent. This worried
him until the thought came to him of hiring a servant for Gertrude and
of buying a bicycle for Marian.

He mailed the bulky manuscript to _The Youth’s Companion_, and on
Saturday afternoon, after having planned an article on pearl-diving, he
went to see Ruth. He had telephoned, and she went herself to greet him
at the door. The old familiar blaze of health rushed out from him and
struck her like a blow. It seemed to enter into her body and course
through her veins in a liquid glow, and to set her quivering with its
imparted strength. He flushed warmly as he took her hand and looked
into her blue eyes, but the fresh bronze of eight months of sun hid the
flush, though it did not protect the neck from the gnawing chafe of the
stiff collar. She noted the red line of it with amusement which quickly
vanished as she glanced at his clothes. They really fitted him,—it was
his first made-to-order suit,—and he seemed slimmer and better
modelled. In addition, his cloth cap had been replaced by a soft hat,
which she commanded him to put on and then complimented him on his
appearance. She did not remember when she had felt so happy. This
change in him was her handiwork, and she was proud of it and fired with
ambition further to help him.

But the most radical change of all, and the one that pleased her most,
was the change in his speech. Not only did he speak more correctly, but
he spoke more easily, and there were many new words in his vocabulary.
When he grew excited or enthusiastic, however, he dropped back into the
old slurring and the dropping of final consonants. Also, there was an
awkward hesitancy, at times, as he essayed the new words he had
learned. On the other hand, along with his ease of expression, he
displayed a lightness and facetiousness of thought that delighted her.
It was his old spirit of humor and badinage that had made him a
favorite in his own class, but which he had hitherto been unable to use
in her presence through lack of words and training. He was just
beginning to orientate himself and to feel that he was not wholly an
intruder. But he was very tentative, fastidiously so, letting Ruth set
the pace of sprightliness and fancy, keeping up with her but never
daring to go beyond her.

He told her of what he had been doing, and of his plan to write for a
livelihood and of going on with his studies. But he was disappointed at
her lack of approval. She did not think much of his plan.

“You see,” she said frankly, “writing must be a trade, like anything
else. Not that I know anything about it, of course. I only bring common
judgment to bear. You couldn’t hope to be a blacksmith without spending
three years at learning the trade—or is it five years! Now writers are
so much better paid than blacksmiths that there must be ever so many
more men who would like to write, who—try to write.”

“But then, may not I be peculiarly constituted to write?” he queried,
secretly exulting at the language he had used, his swift imagination
throwing the whole scene and atmosphere upon a vast screen along with a
thousand other scenes from his life—scenes that were rough and raw,
gross and bestial.

The whole composite vision was achieved with the speed of light,
producing no pause in the conversation, nor interrupting his calm train
of thought. On the screen of his imagination he saw himself and this
sweet and beautiful girl, facing each other and conversing in good
English, in a room of books and paintings and tone and culture, and all
illuminated by a bright light of steadfast brilliance; while ranged
about and fading away to the remote edges of the screen were
antithetical scenes, each scene a picture, and he the onlooker, free to
look at will upon what he wished. He saw these other scenes through
drifting vapors and swirls of sullen fog dissolving before shafts of
red and garish light. He saw cowboys at the bar, drinking fierce
whiskey, the air filled with obscenity and ribald language, and he saw
himself with them drinking and cursing with the wildest, or sitting at
table with them, under smoking kerosene lamps, while the chips clicked
and clattered and the cards were dealt around. He saw himself, stripped
to the waist, with naked fists, fighting his great fight with Liverpool
Red in the forecastle of the _Susquehanna_; and he saw the bloody deck
of the _John Rogers_, that gray morning of attempted mutiny, the mate
kicking in death-throes on the main-hatch, the revolver in the old
man’s hand spitting fire and smoke, the men with passion-wrenched
faces, of brutes screaming vile blasphemies and falling about him—and
then he returned to the central scene, calm and clean in the steadfast
light, where Ruth sat and talked with him amid books and paintings; and
he saw the grand piano upon which she would later play to him; and he
heard the echoes of his own selected and correct words, “But then, may
I not be peculiarly constituted to write?”

“But no matter how peculiarly constituted a man may be for
blacksmithing,” she was laughing, “I never heard of one becoming a
blacksmith without first serving his apprenticeship.”

“What would you advise?” he asked. “And don’t forget that I feel in me
this capacity to write—I can’t explain it; I just know that it is in
me.”

“You must get a thorough education,” was the answer, “whether or not
you ultimately become a writer. This education is indispensable for
whatever career you select, and it must not be slipshod or sketchy. You
should go to high school.”

“Yes—” he began; but she interrupted with an afterthought:-

“Of course, you could go on with your writing, too.”

“I would have to,” he said grimly.

“Why?” She looked at him, prettily puzzled, for she did not quite like
the persistence with which he clung to his notion.

“Because, without writing there wouldn’t be any high school. I must
live and buy books and clothes, you know.”

“I’d forgotten that,” she laughed. “Why weren’t you born with an
income?”

“I’d rather have good health and imagination,” he answered. “I can make
good on the income, but the other things have to be made good for—” He
almost said “you,” then amended his sentence to, “have to be made good
for one.”

“Don’t say ‘make good,’” she cried, sweetly petulant. “It’s slang, and
it’s horrid.”

He flushed, and stammered, “That’s right, and I only wish you’d correct
me every time.”

“I—I’d like to,” she said haltingly. “You have so much in you that is
good that I want to see you perfect.”

He was clay in her hands immediately, as passionately desirous of being
moulded by her as she was desirous of shaping him into the image of her
ideal of man. And when she pointed out the opportuneness of the time,
that the entrance examinations to high school began on the following
Monday, he promptly volunteered that he would take them.

Then she played and sang to him, while he gazed with hungry yearning at
her, drinking in her loveliness and marvelling that there should not be
a hundred suitors listening there and longing for her as he listened
and longed.




CHAPTER X.


He stopped to dinner that evening, and, much to Ruth’s satisfaction,
made a favorable impression on her father. They talked about the sea as
a career, a subject which Martin had at his finger-ends, and Mr. Morse
remarked afterward that he seemed a very clear-headed young man. In his
avoidance of slang and his search after right words, Martin was
compelled to talk slowly, which enabled him to find the best thoughts
that were in him. He was more at ease than that first night at dinner,
nearly a year before, and his shyness and modesty even commended him to
Mrs. Morse, who was pleased at his manifest improvement.

“He is the first man that ever drew passing notice from Ruth,” she told
her husband. “She has been so singularly backward where men are
concerned that I have been worried greatly.”

Mr. Morse looked at his wife curiously.

“You mean to use this young sailor to wake her up?” he questioned.

“I mean that she is not to die an old maid if I can help it,” was the
answer. “If this young Eden can arouse her interest in mankind in
general, it will be a good thing.”

“A very good thing,” he commented. “But suppose,—and we must suppose,
sometimes, my dear,—suppose he arouses her interest too particularly in
him?”

“Impossible,” Mrs. Morse laughed. “She is three years older than he,
and, besides, it is impossible. Nothing will ever come of it. Trust
that to me.”

And so Martin’s rôle was arranged for him, while he, led on by Arthur
and Norman, was meditating an extravagance. They were going out for a
ride into the hills Sunday morning on their wheels, which did not
interest Martin until he learned that Ruth, too, rode a wheel and was
going along. He did not ride, nor own a wheel, but if Ruth rode, it was
up to him to begin, was his decision; and when he said good night, he
stopped in at a cyclery on his way home and spent forty dollars for a
wheel. It was more than a month’s hard-earned wages, and it reduced his
stock of money amazingly; but when he added the hundred dollars he was
to receive from the _Examiner_ to the four hundred and twenty dollars
that was the least _The Youth’s Companion_ could pay him, he felt that
he had reduced the perplexity the unwonted amount of money had caused
him. Nor did he mind, in the course of learning to ride the wheel home,
the fact that he ruined his suit of clothes. He caught the tailor by
telephone that night from Mr. Higginbotham’s store and ordered another
suit. Then he carried the wheel up the narrow stairway that clung like
a fire-escape to the rear wall of the building, and when he had moved
his bed out from the wall, found there was just space enough in the
small room for himself and the wheel.

Sunday he had intended to devote to studying for the high school
examination, but the pearl-diving article lured him away, and he spent
the day in the white-hot fever of re-creating the beauty and romance
that burned in him. The fact that the _Examiner_ of that morning had
failed to publish his treasure-hunting article did not dash his
spirits. He was at too great a height for that, and having been deaf to
a twice-repeated summons, he went without the heavy Sunday dinner with
which Mr. Higginbotham invariably graced his table. To Mr. Higginbotham
such a dinner was advertisement of his worldly achievement and
prosperity, and he honored it by delivering platitudinous sermonettes
upon American institutions and the opportunity said institutions gave
to any hard-working man to rise—the rise, in his case, which he pointed
out unfailingly, being from a grocer’s clerk to the ownership of
Higginbotham’s Cash Store.

Martin Eden looked with a sigh at his unfinished “Pearl-diving” on
Monday morning, and took the car down to Oakland to the high school.
And when, days later, he applied for the results of his examinations,
he learned that he had failed in everything save grammar.

“Your grammar is excellent,” Professor Hilton informed him, staring at
him through heavy spectacles; “but you know nothing, positively
nothing, in the other branches, and your United States history is
abominable—there is no other word for it, abominable. I should advise
you—”

Professor Hilton paused and glared at him, unsympathetic and
unimaginative as one of his own test-tubes. He was professor of physics
in the high school, possessor of a large family, a meagre salary, and a
select fund of parrot-learned knowledge.

“Yes, sir,” Martin said humbly, wishing somehow that the man at the
desk in the library was in Professor Hilton’s place just then.

“And I should advise you to go back to the grammar school for at least
two years. Good day.”

Martin was not deeply affected by his failure, though he was surprised
at Ruth’s shocked expression when he told her Professor Hilton’s
advice. Her disappointment was so evident that he was sorry he had
failed, but chiefly so for her sake.

“You see I was right,” she said. “You know far more than any of the
students entering high school, and yet you can’t pass the examinations.
It is because what education you have is fragmentary, sketchy. You need
the discipline of study, such as only skilled teachers can give you.
You must be thoroughly grounded. Professor Hilton is right, and if I
were you, I’d go to night school. A year and a half of it might enable
you to catch up that additional six months. Besides, that would leave
you your days in which to write, or, if you could not make your living
by your pen, you would have your days in which to work in some
position.”

But if my days are taken up with work and my nights with school, when
am I going to see you?—was Martin’s first thought, though he refrained
from uttering it. Instead, he said:-

“It seems so babyish for me to be going to night school. But I wouldn’t
mind that if I thought it would pay. But I don’t think it will pay. I
can do the work quicker than they can teach me. It would be a loss of
time—” he thought of her and his desire to have her—“and I can’t afford
the time. I haven’t the time to spare, in fact.”

“There is so much that is necessary.” She looked at him gently, and he
was a brute to oppose her. “Physics and chemistry—you can’t do them
without laboratory study; and you’ll find algebra and geometry almost
hopeless without instruction. You need the skilled teachers, the
specialists in the art of imparting knowledge.”

He was silent for a minute, casting about for the least vainglorious
way in which to express himself.

“Please don’t think I’m bragging,” he began. “I don’t intend it that
way at all. But I have a feeling that I am what I may call a natural
student. I can study by myself. I take to it kindly, like a duck to
water. You see yourself what I did with grammar. And I’ve learned much
of other things—you would never dream how much. And I’m only getting
started. Wait till I get—” He hesitated and assured himself of the
pronunciation before he said “momentum. I’m getting my first real feel
of things now. I’m beginning to size up the situation—”

“Please don’t say ‘size up,’” she interrupted.

“To get a line on things,” he hastily amended.

“That doesn’t mean anything in correct English,” she objected.

He floundered for a fresh start.

“What I’m driving at is that I’m beginning to get the lay of the land.”

Out of pity she forebore, and he went on.

“Knowledge seems to me like a chart-room. Whenever I go into the
library, I am impressed that way. The part played by teachers is to
teach the student the contents of the chart-room in a systematic way.
The teachers are guides to the chart-room, that’s all. It’s not
something that they have in their own heads. They don’t make it up,
don’t create it. It’s all in the chart-room and they know their way
about in it, and it’s their business to show the place to strangers who
might else get lost. Now I don’t get lost easily. I have the bump of
location. I usually know where I’m at—What’s wrong now?”

“Don’t say ‘where I’m at.’”

“That’s right,” he said gratefully, “where I am. But where am I at—I
mean, where am I? Oh, yes, in the chart-room. Well, some people—”

“Persons,” she corrected.

“Some persons need guides, most persons do; but I think I can get along
without them. I’ve spent a lot of time in the chart-room now, and I’m
on the edge of knowing my way about, what charts I want to refer to,
what coasts I want to explore. And from the way I line it up, I’ll
explore a whole lot more quickly by myself. The speed of a fleet, you
know, is the speed of the slowest ship, and the speed of the teachers
is affected the same way. They can’t go any faster than the ruck of
their scholars, and I can set a faster pace for myself than they set
for a whole schoolroom.”

“‘He travels the fastest who travels alone,’” she quoted at him.

But I’d travel faster with you just the same, was what he wanted to
blurt out, as he caught a vision of a world without end of sunlit
spaces and starry voids through which he drifted with her, his arm
around her, her pale gold hair blowing about his face. In the same
instant he was aware of the pitiful inadequacy of speech. God! If he
could so frame words that she could see what he then saw! And he felt
the stir in him, like a throe of yearning pain, of the desire to paint
these visions that flashed unsummoned on the mirror of his mind. Ah,
that was it! He caught at the hem of the secret. It was the very thing
that the great writers and master-poets did. That was why they were
giants. They knew how to express what they thought, and felt, and saw.
Dogs asleep in the sun often whined and barked, but they were unable to
tell what they saw that made them whine and bark. He had often wondered
what it was. And that was all he was, a dog asleep in the sun. He saw
noble and beautiful visions, but he could only whine and bark at Ruth.
But he would cease sleeping in the sun. He would stand up, with open
eyes, and he would struggle and toil and learn until, with eyes
unblinded and tongue untied, he could share with her his visioned
wealth. Other men had discovered the trick of expression, of making
words obedient servitors, and of making combinations of words mean more
than the sum of their separate meanings. He was stirred profoundly by
the passing glimpse at the secret, and he was again caught up in the
vision of sunlit spaces and starry voids—until it came to him that it
was very quiet, and he saw Ruth regarding him with an amused expression
and a smile in her eyes.

“I have had a great visioning,” he said, and at the sound of his words
in his own ears his heart gave a leap. Where had those words come from?
They had adequately expressed the pause his vision had put in the
conversation. It was a miracle. Never had he so loftily framed a lofty
thought. But never had he attempted to frame lofty thoughts in words.
That was it. That explained it. He had never tried. But Swinburne had,
and Tennyson, and Kipling, and all the other poets. His mind flashed on
to his “Pearl-diving.” He had never dared the big things, the spirit of
the beauty that was a fire in him. That article would be a different
thing when he was done with it. He was appalled by the vastness of the
beauty that rightfully belonged in it, and again his mind flashed and
dared, and he demanded of himself why he could not chant that beauty in
noble verse as the great poets did. And there was all the mysterious
delight and spiritual wonder of his love for Ruth. Why could he not
chant that, too, as the poets did? They had sung of love. So would he.
By God!—

And in his frightened ears he heard his exclamation echoing. Carried
away, he had breathed it aloud. The blood surged into his face, wave
upon wave, mastering the bronze of it till the blush of shame flaunted
itself from collar-rim to the roots of his hair.

“I—I—beg your pardon,” he stammered. “I was thinking.”

“It sounded as if you were praying,” she said bravely, but she felt
herself inside to be withering and shrinking. It was the first time she
had heard an oath from the lips of a man she knew, and she was shocked,
not merely as a matter of principle and training, but shocked in spirit
by this rough blast of life in the garden of her sheltered maidenhood.

But she forgave, and with surprise at the ease of her forgiveness.
Somehow it was not so difficult to forgive him anything. He had not had
a chance to be as other men, and he was trying so hard, and succeeding,
too. It never entered her head that there could be any other reason for
her being kindly disposed toward him. She was tenderly disposed toward
him, but she did not know it. She had no way of knowing it. The placid
poise of twenty-four years without a single love affair did not fit her
with a keen perception of her own feelings, and she who had never
warmed to actual love was unaware that she was warming now.




CHAPTER XI.


Martin went back to his pearl-diving article, which would have been
finished sooner if it had not been broken in upon so frequently by his
attempts to write poetry. His poems were love poems, inspired by Ruth,
but they were never completed. Not in a day could he learn to chant in
noble verse. Rhyme and metre and structure were serious enough in
themselves, but there was, over and beyond them, an intangible and
evasive something that he caught in all great poetry, but which he
could not catch and imprison in his own. It was the elusive spirit of
poetry itself that he sensed and sought after but could not capture. It
seemed a glow to him, a warm and trailing vapor, ever beyond his
reaching, though sometimes he was rewarded by catching at shreds of it
and weaving them into phrases that echoed in his brain with haunting
notes or drifted across his vision in misty wafture of unseen beauty.
It was baffling. He ached with desire to express and could but gibber
prosaically as everybody gibbered. He read his fragments aloud. The
metre marched along on perfect feet, and the rhyme pounded a longer and
equally faultless rhythm, but the glow and high exaltation that he felt
within were lacking. He could not understand, and time and again, in
despair, defeated and depressed, he returned to his article. Prose was
certainly an easier medium.

Following the “Pearl-diving,” he wrote an article on the sea as a
career, another on turtle-catching, and a third on the northeast
trades. Then he tried, as an experiment, a short story, and before he
broke his stride he had finished six short stories and despatched them
to various magazines. He wrote prolifically, intensely, from morning
till night, and late at night, except when he broke off to go to the
reading-room, draw books from the library, or to call on Ruth. He was
profoundly happy. Life was pitched high. He was in a fever that never
broke. The joy of creation that is supposed to belong to the gods was
his. All the life about him—the odors of stale vegetables and soapsuds,
the slatternly form of his sister, and the jeering face of Mr.
Higginbotham—was a dream. The real world was in his mind, and the
stories he wrote were so many pieces of reality out of his mind.

The days were too short. There was so much he wanted to study. He cut
his sleep down to five hours and found that he could get along upon it.
He tried four hours and a half, and regretfully came back to five. He
could joyfully have spent all his waking hours upon any one of his
pursuits. It was with regret that he ceased from writing to study, that
he ceased from study to go to the library, that he tore himself away
from that chart-room of knowledge or from the magazines in the
reading-room that were filled with the secrets of writers who succeeded
in selling their wares. It was like severing heart strings, when he was
with Ruth, to stand up and go; and he scorched through the dark streets
so as to get home to his books at the least possible expense of time.
And hardest of all was it to shut up the algebra or physics, put
note-book and pencil aside, and close his tired eyes in sleep. He hated
the thought of ceasing to live, even for so short a time, and his sole
consolation was that the alarm clock was set five hours ahead. He would
lose only five hours anyway, and then the jangling bell would jerk him
out of unconsciousness and he would have before him another glorious
day of nineteen hours.

In the meantime the weeks were passing, his money was ebbing low, and
there was no money coming in. A month after he had mailed it, the
adventure serial for boys was returned to him by _The Youth’s
Companion_. The rejection slip was so tactfully worded that he felt
kindly toward the editor. But he did not feel so kindly toward the
editor of the _San Francisco Examiner_. After waiting two whole weeks,
Martin had written to him. A week later he wrote again. At the end of
the month, he went over to San Francisco and personally called upon the
editor. But he did not meet that exalted personage, thanks to a
Cerberus of an office boy, of tender years and red hair, who guarded
the portals. At the end of the fifth week the manuscript came back to
him, by mail, without comment. There was no rejection slip, no
explanation, nothing. In the same way his other articles were tied up
with the other leading San Francisco papers. When he recovered them, he
sent them to the magazines in the East, from which they were returned
more promptly, accompanied always by the printed rejection slips.

The short stories were returned in similar fashion. He read them over
and over, and liked them so much that he could not puzzle out the cause
of their rejection, until, one day, he read in a newspaper that
manuscripts should always be typewritten. That explained it. Of course
editors were so busy that they could not afford the time and strain of
reading handwriting. Martin rented a typewriter and spent a day
mastering the machine. Each day he typed what he composed, and he typed
his earlier manuscripts as fast as they were returned him. He was
surprised when the typed ones began to come back. His jaw seemed to
become squarer, his chin more aggressive, and he bundled the
manuscripts off to new editors.

The thought came to him that he was not a good judge of his own work.
He tried it out on Gertrude. He read his stories aloud to her. Her eyes
glistened, and she looked at him proudly as she said:-

“Ain’t it grand, you writin’ those sort of things.”

“Yes, yes,” he demanded impatiently. “But the story—how did you like
it?”

“Just grand,” was the reply. “Just grand, an’ thrilling, too. I was all
worked up.”

He could see that her mind was not clear. The perplexity was strong in
her good-natured face. So he waited.

“But, say, Mart,” after a long pause, “how did it end? Did that young
man who spoke so highfalutin’ get her?”

And, after he had explained the end, which he thought he had made
artistically obvious, she would say:-

“That’s what I wanted to know. Why didn’t you write that way in the
story?”

One thing he learned, after he had read her a number of stories,
namely, that she liked happy endings.

“That story was perfectly grand,” she announced, straightening up from
the wash-tub with a tired sigh and wiping the sweat from her forehead
with a red, steamy hand; “but it makes me sad. I want to cry. There is
too many sad things in the world anyway. It makes me happy to think
about happy things. Now if he’d married her, and—You don’t mind, Mart?”
she queried apprehensively. “I just happen to feel that way, because
I’m tired, I guess. But the story was grand just the same, perfectly
grand. Where are you goin’ to sell it?”

“That’s a horse of another color,” he laughed.

“But if you _did_ sell it, what do you think you’d get for it?”

“Oh, a hundred dollars. That would be the least, the way prices go.”

“My! I do hope you’ll sell it!”

“Easy money, eh?” Then he added proudly: “I wrote it in two days.
That’s fifty dollars a day.”

He longed to read his stories to Ruth, but did not dare. He would wait
till some were published, he decided, then she would understand what he
had been working for. In the meantime he toiled on. Never had the
spirit of adventure lured him more strongly than on this amazing
exploration of the realm of mind. He bought the text-books on physics
and chemistry, and, along with his algebra, worked out problems and
demonstrations. He took the laboratory proofs on faith, and his intense
power of vision enabled him to see the reactions of chemicals more
understandingly than the average student saw them in the laboratory.
Martin wandered on through the heavy pages, overwhelmed by the clews he
was getting to the nature of things. He had accepted the world as the
world, but now he was comprehending the organization of it, the play
and interplay of force and matter. Spontaneous explanations of old
matters were continually arising in his mind. Levers and purchases
fascinated him, and his mind roved backward to hand-spikes and blocks
and tackles at sea. The theory of navigation, which enabled the ships
to travel unerringly their courses over the pathless ocean, was made
clear to him. The mysteries of storm, and rain, and tide were revealed,
and the reason for the existence of trade-winds made him wonder whether
he had written his article on the northeast trade too soon. At any rate
he knew he could write it better now. One afternoon he went out with
Arthur to the University of California, and, with bated breath and a
feeling of religious awe, went through the laboratories, saw
demonstrations, and listened to a physics professor lecturing to his
classes.

But he did not neglect his writing. A stream of short stories flowed
from his pen, and he branched out into the easier forms of verse—the
kind he saw printed in the magazines—though he lost his head and wasted
two weeks on a tragedy in blank verse, the swift rejection of which, by
half a dozen magazines, dumfounded him. Then he discovered Henley and
wrote a series of sea-poems on the model of “Hospital Sketches.” They
were simple poems, of light and color, and romance and adventure. “Sea
Lyrics,” he called them, and he judged them to be the best work he had
yet done. There were thirty, and he completed them in a month, doing
one a day after having done his regular day’s work on fiction, which
day’s work was the equivalent to a week’s work of the average
successful writer. The toil meant nothing to him. It was not toil. He
was finding speech, and all the beauty and wonder that had been pent
for years behind his inarticulate lips was now pouring forth in a wild
and virile flood.

He showed the “Sea Lyrics” to no one, not even to the editors. He had
become distrustful of editors. But it was not distrust that prevented
him from submitting the “Lyrics.” They were so beautiful to him that he
was impelled to save them to share with Ruth in some glorious, far-off
time when he would dare to read to her what he had written. Against
that time he kept them with him, reading them aloud, going over them
until he knew them by heart.

He lived every moment of his waking hours, and he lived in his sleep,
his subjective mind rioting through his five hours of surcease and
combining the thoughts and events of the day into grotesque and
impossible marvels. In reality, he never rested, and a weaker body or a
less firmly poised brain would have been prostrated in a general
break-down. His late afternoon calls on Ruth were rarer now, for June
was approaching, when she would take her degree and finish with the
university. Bachelor of Arts!—when he thought of her degree, it seemed
she fled beyond him faster than he could pursue.

One afternoon a week she gave to him, and arriving late, he usually
stayed for dinner and for music afterward. Those were his red-letter
days. The atmosphere of the house, in such contrast with that in which
he lived, and the mere nearness to her, sent him forth each time with a
firmer grip on his resolve to climb the heights. In spite of the beauty
in him, and the aching desire to create, it was for her that he
struggled. He was a lover first and always. All other things he
subordinated to love.

Greater than his adventure in the world of thought was his
love-adventure. The world itself was not so amazing because of the
atoms and molecules that composed it according to the propulsions of
irresistible force; what made it amazing was the fact that Ruth lived
in it. She was the most amazing thing he had ever known, or dreamed, or
guessed.

But he was oppressed always by her remoteness. She was so far from him,
and he did not know how to approach her. He had been a success with
girls and women in his own class; but he had never loved any of them,
while he did love her, and besides, she was not merely of another
class. His very love elevated her above all classes. She was a being
apart, so far apart that he did not know how to draw near to her as a
lover should draw near. It was true, as he acquired knowledge and
language, that he was drawing nearer, talking her speech, discovering
ideas and delights in common; but this did not satisfy his lover’s
yearning. His lover’s imagination had made her holy, too holy, too
spiritualized, to have any kinship with him in the flesh. It was his
own love that thrust her from him and made her seem impossible for him.
Love itself denied him the one thing that it desired.

And then, one day, without warning, the gulf between them was bridged
for a moment, and thereafter, though the gulf remained, it was ever
narrower. They had been eating cherries—great, luscious, black cherries
with a juice of the color of dark wine. And later, as she read aloud to
him from “The Princess,” he chanced to notice the stain of the cherries
on her lips. For the moment her divinity was shattered. She was clay,
after all, mere clay, subject to the common law of clay as his clay was
subject, or anybody’s clay. Her lips were flesh like his, and cherries
dyed them as cherries dyed his. And if so with her lips, then was it so
with all of her. She was woman, all woman, just like any woman. It came
upon him abruptly. It was a revelation that stunned him. It was as if
he had seen the sun fall out of the sky, or had seen worshipped purity
polluted.

Then he realized the significance of it, and his heart began pounding
and challenging him to play the lover with this woman who was not a
spirit from other worlds but a mere woman with lips a cherry could
stain. He trembled at the audacity of his thought; but all his soul was
singing, and reason, in a triumphant paean, assured him he was right.
Something of this change in him must have reached her, for she paused
from her reading, looked up at him, and smiled. His eyes dropped from
her blue eyes to her lips, and the sight of the stain maddened him. His
arms all but flashed out to her and around her, in the way of his old
careless life. She seemed to lean toward him, to wait, and all his will
fought to hold him back.

“You were not following a word,” she pouted.

Then she laughed at him, delighting in his confusion, and as he looked
into her frank eyes and knew that she had divined nothing of what he
felt, he became abashed. He had indeed in thought dared too far. Of all
the women he had known there was no woman who would not have
guessed—save her. And she had not guessed. There was the difference.
She was different. He was appalled by his own grossness, awed by her
clear innocence, and he gazed again at her across the gulf. The bridge
had broken down.

But still the incident had brought him nearer. The memory of it
persisted, and in the moments when he was most cast down, he dwelt upon
it eagerly. The gulf was never again so wide. He had accomplished a
distance vastly greater than a bachelorship of arts, or a dozen
bachelorships. She was pure, it was true, as he had never dreamed of
purity; but cherries stained her lips. She was subject to the laws of
the universe just as inexorably as he was. She had to eat to live, and
when she got her feet wet, she caught cold. But that was not the point.
If she could feel hunger and thirst, and heat and cold, then could she
feel love—and love for a man. Well, he was a man. And why could he not
be the man? “It’s up to me to make good,” he would murmur fervently. “I
will be _the_ man. I will make myself _the_ man. I will make good.”




CHAPTER XII.


Early one evening, struggling with a sonnet that twisted all awry the
beauty and thought that trailed in glow and vapor through his brain,
Martin was called to the telephone.

“It’s a lady’s voice, a fine lady’s,” Mr. Higginbotham, who had called
him, jeered.

Martin went to the telephone in the corner of the room, and felt a wave
of warmth rush through him as he heard Ruth’s voice. In his battle with
the sonnet he had forgotten her existence, and at the sound of her
voice his love for her smote him like a sudden blow. And such a
voice!—delicate and sweet, like a strain of music heard far off and
faint, or, better, like a bell of silver, a perfect tone, crystal-pure.
No mere woman had a voice like that. There was something celestial
about it, and it came from other worlds. He could scarcely hear what it
said, so ravished was he, though he controlled his face, for he knew
that Mr. Higginbotham’s ferret eyes were fixed upon him.

It was not much that Ruth wanted to say—merely that Norman had been
going to take her to a lecture that night, but that he had a headache,
and she was so disappointed, and she had the tickets, and that if he
had no other engagement, would he be good enough to take her?

Would he! He fought to suppress the eagerness in his voice. It was
amazing. He had always seen her in her own house. And he had never
dared to ask her to go anywhere with him. Quite irrelevantly, still at
the telephone and talking with her, he felt an overpowering desire to
die for her, and visions of heroic sacrifice shaped and dissolved in
his whirling brain. He loved her so much, so terribly, so hopelessly.
In that moment of mad happiness that she should go out with him, go to
a lecture with him—with him, Martin Eden—she soared so far above him
that there seemed nothing else for him to do than die for her. It was
the only fit way in which he could express the tremendous and lofty
emotion he felt for her. It was the sublime abnegation of true love
that comes to all lovers, and it came to him there, at the telephone,
in a whirlwind of fire and glory; and to die for her, he felt, was to
have lived and loved well. And he was only twenty-one, and he had never
been in love before.

His hand trembled as he hung up the receiver, and he was weak from the
organ which had stirred him. His eyes were shining like an angel’s, and
his face was transfigured, purged of all earthly dross, and pure and
holy.

“Makin’ dates outside, eh?” his brother-in-law sneered. “You know what
that means. You’ll be in the police court yet.”

But Martin could not come down from the height. Not even the bestiality
of the allusion could bring him back to earth. Anger and hurt were
beneath him. He had seen a great vision and was as a god, and he could
feel only profound and awful pity for this maggot of a man. He did not
look at him, and though his eyes passed over him, he did not see him;
and as in a dream he passed out of the room to dress. It was not until
he had reached his own room and was tying his necktie that he became
aware of a sound that lingered unpleasantly in his ears. On
investigating this sound he identified it as the final snort of Bernard
Higginbotham, which somehow had not penetrated to his brain before.

As Ruth’s front door closed behind them and he came down the steps with
her, he found himself greatly perturbed. It was not unalloyed bliss,
taking her to the lecture. He did not know what he ought to do. He had
seen, on the streets, with persons of her class, that the women took
the men’s arms. But then, again, he had seen them when they didn’t; and
he wondered if it was only in the evening that arms were taken, or only
between husbands and wives and relatives.

Just before he reached the sidewalk, he remembered Minnie. Minnie had
always been a stickler. She had called him down the second time she
walked out with him, because he had gone along on the inside, and she
had laid the law down to him that a gentleman always walked on the
outside—when he was with a lady. And Minnie had made a practice of
kicking his heels, whenever they crossed from one side of the street to
the other, to remind him to get over on the outside. He wondered where
she had got that item of etiquette, and whether it had filtered down
from above and was all right.

It wouldn’t do any harm to try it, he decided, by the time they had
reached the sidewalk; and he swung behind Ruth and took up his station
on the outside. Then the other problem presented itself. Should he
offer her his arm? He had never offered anybody his arm in his life.
The girls he had known never took the fellows’ arms. For the first
several times they walked freely, side by side, and after that it was
arms around the waists, and heads against the fellows’ shoulders where
the streets were unlighted. But this was different. She wasn’t that
kind of a girl. He must do something.

He crooked the arm next to her—crooked it very slightly and with secret
tentativeness, not invitingly, but just casually, as though he was
accustomed to walk that way. And then the wonderful thing happened. He
felt her hand upon his arm. Delicious thrills ran through him at the
contact, and for a few sweet moments it seemed that he had left the
solid earth and was flying with her through the air. But he was soon
back again, perturbed by a new complication. They were crossing the
street. This would put him on the inside. He should be on the outside.
Should he therefore drop her arm and change over? And if he did so,
would he have to repeat the manoeuvre the next time? And the next?
There was something wrong about it, and he resolved not to caper about
and play the fool. Yet he was not satisfied with his conclusion, and
when he found himself on the inside, he talked quickly and earnestly,
making a show of being carried away by what he was saying, so that, in
case he was wrong in not changing sides, his enthusiasm would seem the
cause for his carelessness.

As they crossed Broadway, he came face to face with a new problem. In
the blaze of the electric lights, he saw Lizzie Connolly and her giggly
friend. Only for an instant he hesitated, then his hand went up and his
hat came off. He could not be disloyal to his kind, and it was to more
than Lizzie Connolly that his hat was lifted. She nodded and looked at
him boldly, not with soft and gentle eyes like Ruth’s, but with eyes
that were handsome and hard, and that swept on past him to Ruth and
itemized her face and dress and station. And he was aware that Ruth
looked, too, with quick eyes that were timid and mild as a dove’s, but
which saw, in a look that was a flutter on and past, the working-class
girl in her cheap finery and under the strange hat that all
working-class girls were wearing just then.

“What a pretty girl!” Ruth said a moment later.

Martin could have blessed her, though he said:-

“I don’t know. I guess it’s all a matter of personal taste, but she
doesn’t strike me as being particularly pretty.”

“Why, there isn’t one woman in ten thousand with features as regular as
hers. They are splendid. Her face is as clear-cut as a cameo. And her
eyes are beautiful.”

“Do you think so?” Martin queried absently, for to him there was only
one beautiful woman in the world, and she was beside him, her hand upon
his arm.

“Do I think so? If that girl had proper opportunity to dress, Mr. Eden,
and if she were taught how to carry herself, you would be fairly
dazzled by her, and so would all men.”

“She would have to be taught how to speak,” he commented, “or else most
of the men wouldn’t understand her. I’m sure you couldn’t understand a
quarter of what she said if she just spoke naturally.”

“Nonsense! You are as bad as Arthur when you try to make your point.”

“You forget how I talked when you first met me. I have learned a new
language since then. Before that time I talked as that girl talks. Now
I can manage to make myself understood sufficiently in your language to
explain that you do not know that other girl’s language. And do you
know why she carries herself the way she does? I think about such
things now, though I never used to think about them, and I am beginning
to understand—much.”

“But why does she?”

“She has worked long hours for years at machines. When one’s body is
young, it is very pliable, and hard work will mould it like putty
according to the nature of the work. I can tell at a glance the trades
of many workingmen I meet on the street. Look at me. Why am I rolling
all about the shop? Because of the years I put in on the sea. If I’d
put in the same years cow-punching, with my body young and pliable, I
wouldn’t be rolling now, but I’d be bow-legged. And so with that girl.
You noticed that her eyes were what I might call hard. She has never
been sheltered. She has had to take care of herself, and a young girl
can’t take care of herself and keep her eyes soft and gentle like—like
yours, for example.”

“I think you are right,” Ruth said in a low voice. “And it is too bad.
She is such a pretty girl.”

He looked at her and saw her eyes luminous with pity. And then he
remembered that he loved her and was lost in amazement at his fortune
that permitted him to love her and to take her on his arm to a lecture.

Who are you, Martin Eden? he demanded of himself in the looking-glass,
that night when he got back to his room. He gazed at himself long and
curiously. Who are you? What are you? Where do you belong? You belong
by rights to girls like Lizzie Connolly. You belong with the legions of
toil, with all that is low, and vulgar, and unbeautiful. You belong
with the oxen and the drudges, in dirty surroundings among smells and
stenches. There are the stale vegetables now. Those potatoes are
rotting. Smell them, damn you, smell them. And yet you dare to open the
books, to listen to beautiful music, to learn to love beautiful
paintings, to speak good English, to think thoughts that none of your
own kind thinks, to tear yourself away from the oxen and the Lizzie
Connollys and to love a pale spirit of a woman who is a million miles
beyond you and who lives in the stars! Who are you? and what are you?
damn you! And are you going to make good?

He shook his fist at himself in the glass, and sat down on the edge of
the bed to dream for a space with wide eyes. Then he got out note-book
and algebra and lost himself in quadratic equations, while the hours
slipped by, and the stars dimmed, and the gray of dawn flooded against
his window.




CHAPTER XIII.


It was the knot of wordy socialists and working-class philosophers that
held forth in the City Hall Park on warm afternoons that was
responsible for the great discovery. Once or twice in the month, while
riding through the park on his way to the library, Martin dismounted
from his wheel and listened to the arguments, and each time he tore
himself away reluctantly. The tone of discussion was much lower than at
Mr. Morse’s table. The men were not grave and dignified. They lost
their tempers easily and called one another names, while oaths and
obscene allusions were frequent on their lips. Once or twice he had
seen them come to blows. And yet, he knew not why, there seemed
something vital about the stuff of these men’s thoughts. Their
logomachy was far more stimulating to his intellect than the reserved
and quiet dogmatism of Mr. Morse. These men, who slaughtered English,
gesticulated like lunatics, and fought one another’s ideas with
primitive anger, seemed somehow to be more alive than Mr. Morse and his
crony, Mr. Butler.

Martin had heard Herbert Spencer quoted several times in the park, but
one afternoon a disciple of Spencer’s appeared, a seedy tramp with a
dirty coat buttoned tightly at the throat to conceal the absence of a
shirt. Battle royal was waged, amid the smoking of many cigarettes and
the expectoration of much tobacco-juice, wherein the tramp successfully
held his own, even when a socialist workman sneered, “There is no god
but the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is his prophet.” Martin was
puzzled as to what the discussion was about, but when he rode on to the
library he carried with him a new-born interest in Herbert Spencer, and
because of the frequency with which the tramp had mentioned “First
Principles,” Martin drew out that volume.

So the great discovery began. Once before he had tried Spencer, and
choosing the “Principles of Psychology” to begin with, he had failed as
abjectly as he had failed with Madam Blavatsky. There had been no
understanding the book, and he had returned it unread. But this night,
after algebra and physics, and an attempt at a sonnet, he got into bed
and opened “First Principles.” Morning found him still reading. It was
impossible for him to sleep. Nor did he write that day. He lay on the
bed till his body grew tired, when he tried the hard floor, reading on
his back, the book held in the air above him, or changing from side to
side. He slept that night, and did his writing next morning, and then
the book tempted him and he fell, reading all afternoon, oblivious to
everything and oblivious to the fact that that was the afternoon Ruth
gave to him. His first consciousness of the immediate world about him
was when Bernard Higginbotham jerked open the door and demanded to know
if he thought they were running a restaurant.

Martin Eden had been mastered by curiosity all his days. He wanted to
know, and it was this desire that had sent him adventuring over the
world. But he was now learning from Spencer that he never had known,
and that he never could have known had he continued his sailing and
wandering forever. He had merely skimmed over the surface of things,
observing detached phenomena, accumulating fragments of facts, making
superficial little generalizations—and all and everything quite
unrelated in a capricious and disorderly world of whim and chance. The
mechanism of the flight of birds he had watched and reasoned about with
understanding; but it had never entered his head to try to explain the
process whereby birds, as organic flying mechanisms, had been
developed. He had never dreamed there was such a process. That birds
should have come to be, was unguessed. They always had been. They just
happened.

And as it was with birds, so had it been with everything. His ignorant
and unprepared attempts at philosophy had been fruitless. The medieval
metaphysics of Kant had given him the key to nothing, and had served
the sole purpose of making him doubt his own intellectual powers. In
similar manner his attempt to study evolution had been confined to a
hopelessly technical volume by Romanes. He had understood nothing, and
the only idea he had gathered was that evolution was a dry-as-dust
theory, of a lot of little men possessed of huge and unintelligible
vocabularies. And now he learned that evolution was no mere theory but
an accepted process of development; that scientists no longer disagreed
about it, their only differences being over the method of evolution.

And here was the man Spencer, organizing all knowledge for him,
reducing everything to unity, elaborating ultimate realities, and
presenting to his startled gaze a universe so concrete of realization
that it was like the model of a ship such as sailors make and put into
glass bottles. There was no caprice, no chance. All was law. It was in
obedience to law that the bird flew, and it was in obedience to the
same law that fermenting slime had writhed and squirmed and put out
legs and wings and become a bird.

Martin had ascended from pitch to pitch of intellectual living, and
here he was at a higher pitch than ever. All the hidden things were
laying their secrets bare. He was drunken with comprehension. At night,
asleep, he lived with the gods in colossal nightmare; and awake, in the
day, he went around like a somnambulist, with absent stare, gazing upon
the world he had just discovered. At table he failed to hear the
conversation about petty and ignoble things, his eager mind seeking out
and following cause and effect in everything before him. In the meat on
the platter he saw the shining sun and traced its energy back through
all its transformations to its source a hundred million miles away, or
traced its energy ahead to the moving muscles in his arms that enabled
him to cut the meat, and to the brain wherewith he willed the muscles
to move to cut the meat, until, with inward gaze, he saw the same sun
shining in his brain. He was entranced by illumination, and did not
hear the “Bughouse,” whispered by Jim, nor see the anxiety on his
sister’s face, nor notice the rotary motion of Bernard Higginbotham’s
finger, whereby he imparted the suggestion of wheels revolving in his
brother-in-law’s head.

What, in a way, most profoundly impressed Martin, was the correlation
of knowledge—of all knowledge. He had been curious to know things, and
whatever he acquired he had filed away in separate memory compartments
in his brain. Thus, on the subject of sailing he had an immense store.
On the subject of woman he had a fairly large store. But these two
subjects had been unrelated. Between the two memory compartments there
had been no connection. That, in the fabric of knowledge, there should
be any connection whatever between a woman with hysterics and a
schooner carrying a weather-helm or heaving to in a gale, would have
struck him as ridiculous and impossible. But Herbert Spencer had shown
him not only that it was not ridiculous, but that it was impossible for
there to be no connection. All things were related to all other things
from the farthermost star in the wastes of space to the myriads of
atoms in the grain of sand under one’s foot. This new concept was a
perpetual amazement to Martin, and he found himself engaged continually
in tracing the relationship between all things under the sun and on the
other side of the sun. He drew up lists of the most incongruous things
and was unhappy until he succeeded in establishing kinship between them
all—kinship between love, poetry, earthquake, fire, rattlesnakes,
rainbows, precious gems, monstrosities, sunsets, the roaring of lions,
illuminating gas, cannibalism, beauty, murder, lovers, fulcrums, and
tobacco. Thus, he unified the universe and held it up and looked at it,
or wandered through its byways and alleys and jungles, not as a
terrified traveller in the thick of mysteries seeking an unknown goal,
but observing and charting and becoming familiar with all there was to
know. And the more he knew, the more passionately he admired the
universe, and life, and his own life in the midst of it all.

“You fool!” he cried at his image in the looking-glass. “You wanted to
write, and you tried to write, and you had nothing in you to write
about. What did you have in you?—some childish notions, a few
half-baked sentiments, a lot of undigested beauty, a great black mass
of ignorance, a heart filled to bursting with love, and an ambition as
big as your love and as futile as your ignorance. And you wanted to
write! Why, you’re just on the edge of beginning to get something in
you to write about. You wanted to create beauty, but how could you when
you knew nothing about the nature of beauty? You wanted to write about
life when you knew nothing of the essential characteristics of life.
You wanted to write about the world and the scheme of existence when
the world was a Chinese puzzle to you and all that you could have
written would have been about what you did not know of the scheme of
existence. But cheer up, Martin, my boy. You’ll write yet. You know a
little, a very little, and you’re on the right road now to know more.
Some day, if you’re lucky, you may come pretty close to knowing all
that may be known. Then you will write.”

He brought his great discovery to Ruth, sharing with her all his joy
and wonder in it. But she did not seem to be so enthusiastic over it.
She tacitly accepted it and, in a way, seemed aware of it from her own
studies. It did not stir her deeply, as it did him, and he would have
been surprised had he not reasoned it out that it was not new and fresh
to her as it was to him. Arthur and Norman, he found, believed in
evolution and had read Spencer, though it did not seem to have made any
vital impression upon them, while the young fellow with the glasses and
the mop of hair, Will Olney, sneered disagreeably at Spencer and
repeated the epigram, “There is no god but the Unknowable, and Herbert
Spencer is his prophet.”

But Martin forgave him the sneer, for he had begun to discover that
Olney was not in love with Ruth. Later, he was dumfounded to learn from
various little happenings not only that Olney did not care for Ruth,
but that he had a positive dislike for her. Martin could not understand
this. It was a bit of phenomena that he could not correlate with all
the rest of the phenomena in the universe. But nevertheless he felt
sorry for the young fellow because of the great lack in his nature that
prevented him from a proper appreciation of Ruth’s fineness and beauty.
They rode out into the hills several Sundays on their wheels, and
Martin had ample opportunity to observe the armed truce that existed
between Ruth and Olney. The latter chummed with Norman, throwing Arthur
and Martin into company with Ruth, for which Martin was duly grateful.

Those Sundays were great days for Martin, greatest because he was with
Ruth, and great, also, because they were putting him more on a par with
the young men of her class. In spite of their long years of disciplined
education, he was finding himself their intellectual equal, and the
hours spent with them in conversation was so much practice for him in
the use of the grammar he had studied so hard. He had abandoned the
etiquette books, falling back upon observation to show him the right
things to do. Except when carried away by his enthusiasm, he was always
on guard, keenly watchful of their actions and learning their little
courtesies and refinements of conduct.

The fact that Spencer was very little read was for some time a source
of surprise to Martin. “Herbert Spencer,” said the man at the desk in
the library, “oh, yes, a great mind.” But the man did not seem to know
anything of the content of that great mind. One evening, at dinner,
when Mr. Butler was there, Martin turned the conversation upon Spencer.
Mr. Morse bitterly arraigned the English philosopher’s agnosticism, but
confessed that he had not read “First Principles”; while Mr. Butler
stated that he had no patience with Spencer, had never read a line of
him, and had managed to get along quite well without him. Doubts arose
in Martin’s mind, and had he been less strongly individual he would
have accepted the general opinion and given Herbert Spencer up. As it
was, he found Spencer’s explanation of things convincing; and, as he
phrased it to himself, to give up Spencer would be equivalent to a
navigator throwing the compass and chronometer overboard. So Martin
went on into a thorough study of evolution, mastering more and more the
subject himself, and being convinced by the corroborative testimony of
a thousand independent writers. The more he studied, the more vistas he
caught of fields of knowledge yet unexplored, and the regret that days
were only twenty-four hours long became a chronic complaint with him.

One day, because the days were so short, he decided to give up algebra
and geometry. Trigonometry he had not even attempted. Then he cut
chemistry from his study-list, retaining only physics.

“I am not a specialist,” he said, in defence, to Ruth. “Nor am I going
to try to be a specialist. There are too many special fields for any
one man, in a whole lifetime, to master a tithe of them. I must pursue
general knowledge. When I need the work of specialists, I shall refer
to their books.”

“But that is not like having the knowledge yourself,” she protested.

“But it is unnecessary to have it. We profit from the work of the
specialists. That’s what they are for. When I came in, I noticed the
chimney-sweeps at work. They’re specialists, and when they get done,
you will enjoy clean chimneys without knowing anything about the
construction of chimneys.”

“That’s far-fetched, I am afraid.”

She looked at him curiously, and he felt a reproach in her gaze and
manner. But he was convinced of the rightness of his position.

“All thinkers on general subjects, the greatest minds in the world, in
fact, rely on the specialists. Herbert Spencer did that. He generalized
upon the findings of thousands of investigators. He would have had to
live a thousand lives in order to do it all himself. And so with
Darwin. He took advantage of all that had been learned by the florists
and cattle-breeders.”

“You’re right, Martin,” Olney said. “You know what you’re after, and
Ruth doesn’t. She doesn’t know what she is after for herself even.”

“—Oh, yes,” Olney rushed on, heading off her objection, “I know you
call it general culture. But it doesn’t matter what you study if you
want general culture. You can study French, or you can study German, or
cut them both out and study Esperanto, you’ll get the culture tone just
the same. You can study Greek or Latin, too, for the same purpose,
though it will never be any use to you. It will be culture, though.
Why, Ruth studied Saxon, became clever in it,—that was two years
ago,—and all that she remembers of it now is ‘Whan that sweet Aprile
with his schowers soote’—isn’t that the way it goes?”

“But it’s given you the culture tone just the same,” he laughed, again
heading her off. “I know. We were in the same classes.”

“But you speak of culture as if it should be a means to something,”
Ruth cried out. Her eyes were flashing, and in her cheeks were two
spots of color. “Culture is the end in itself.”

“But that is not what Martin wants.”

“How do you know?”

“What do you want, Martin?” Olney demanded, turning squarely upon him.

Martin felt very uncomfortable, and looked entreaty at Ruth.

“Yes, what do you want?” Ruth asked. “That will settle it.”

“Yes, of course, I want culture,” Martin faltered. “I love beauty, and
culture will give me a finer and keener appreciation of beauty.”

She nodded her head and looked triumph.

“Rot, and you know it,” was Olney’s comment. “Martin’s after career,
not culture. It just happens that culture, in his case, is incidental
to career. If he wanted to be a chemist, culture would be unnecessary.
Martin wants to write, but he’s afraid to say so because it will put
you in the wrong.”

“And why does Martin want to write?” he went on. “Because he isn’t
rolling in wealth. Why do you fill your head with Saxon and general
culture? Because you don’t have to make your way in the world. Your
father sees to that. He buys your clothes for you, and all the rest.
What rotten good is our education, yours and mine and Arthur’s and
Norman’s? We’re soaked in general culture, and if our daddies went
broke to-day, we’d be falling down to-morrow on teachers’ examinations.
The best job you could get, Ruth, would be a country school or music
teacher in a girls’ boarding-school.”

“And pray what would you do?” she asked.

“Not a blessed thing. I could earn a dollar and a half a day, common
labor, and I might get in as instructor in Hanley’s cramming joint—I
say might, mind you, and I might be chucked out at the end of the week
for sheer inability.”

Martin followed the discussion closely, and while he was convinced that
Olney was right, he resented the rather cavalier treatment he accorded
Ruth. A new conception of love formed in his mind as he listened.
Reason had nothing to do with love. It mattered not whether the woman
he loved reasoned correctly or incorrectly. Love was above reason. If
it just happened that she did not fully appreciate his necessity for a
career, that did not make her a bit less lovable. She was all lovable,
and what she thought had nothing to do with her lovableness.

“What’s that?” he replied to a question from Olney that broke in upon
his train of thought.

“I was saying that I hoped you wouldn’t be fool enough to tackle
Latin.”

“But Latin is more than culture,” Ruth broke in. “It is equipment.”

“Well, are you going to tackle it?” Olney persisted.

Martin was sore beset. He could see that Ruth was hanging eagerly upon
his answer.

“I am afraid I won’t have time,” he said finally. “I’d like to, but I
won’t have time.”

“You see, Martin’s not seeking culture,” Olney exulted. “He’s trying to
get somewhere, to do something.”

“Oh, but it’s mental training. It’s mind discipline. It’s what makes
disciplined minds.” Ruth looked expectantly at Martin, as if waiting
for him to change his judgment. “You know, the foot-ball players have
to train before the big game. And that is what Latin does for the
thinker. It trains.”

“Rot and bosh! That’s what they told us when we were kids. But there is
one thing they didn’t tell us then. They let us find it out for
ourselves afterwards.” Olney paused for effect, then added, “And what
they didn’t tell us was that every gentleman should have studied Latin,
but that no gentleman should know Latin.”

“Now that’s unfair,” Ruth cried. “I knew you were turning the
conversation just in order to get off something.”

“It’s clever all right,” was the retort, “but it’s fair, too. The only
men who know their Latin are the apothecaries, the lawyers, and the
Latin professors. And if Martin wants to be one of them, I miss my
guess. But what’s all that got to do with Herbert Spencer anyway?
Martin’s just discovered Spencer, and he’s wild over him. Why? Because
Spencer is taking him somewhere. Spencer couldn’t take me anywhere, nor
you. We haven’t got anywhere to go. You’ll get married some day, and
I’ll have nothing to do but keep track of the lawyers and business
agents who will take care of the money my father’s going to leave me.”

Onley got up to go, but turned at the door and delivered a parting
shot.

“You leave Martin alone, Ruth. He knows what’s best for himself. Look
at what he’s done already. He makes me sick sometimes, sick and ashamed
of myself. He knows more now about the world, and life, and man’s
place, and all the rest, than Arthur, or Norman, or I, or you, too, for
that matter, and in spite of all our Latin, and French, and Saxon, and
culture.”

“But Ruth is my teacher,” Martin answered chivalrously. “She is
responsible for what little I have learned.”

“Rats!” Olney looked at Ruth, and his expression was malicious. “I
suppose you’ll be telling me next that you read Spencer on her
recommendation—only you didn’t. And she doesn’t know anything more
about Darwin and evolution than I do about King Solomon’s mines. What’s
that jawbreaker definition about something or other, of Spencer’s, that
you sprang on us the other day—that indefinite, incoherent homogeneity
thing? Spring it on her, and see if she understands a word of it. That
isn’t culture, you see. Well, tra la, and if you tackle Latin, Martin,
I won’t have any respect for you.”

And all the while, interested in the discussion, Martin had been aware
of an irk in it as well. It was about studies and lessons, dealing with
the rudiments of knowledge, and the schoolboyish tone of it conflicted
with the big things that were stirring in him—with the grip upon life
that was even then crooking his fingers like eagle’s talons, with the
cosmic thrills that made him ache, and with the inchoate consciousness
of mastery of it all. He likened himself to a poet, wrecked on the
shores of a strange land, filled with power of beauty, stumbling and
stammering and vainly trying to sing in the rough, barbaric tongue of
his brethren in the new land. And so with him. He was alive, painfully
alive, to the great universal things, and yet he was compelled to
potter and grope among schoolboy topics and debate whether or not he
should study Latin.

“What in hell has Latin to do with it?” he demanded before his mirror
that night. “I wish dead people would stay dead. Why should I and the
beauty in me be ruled by the dead? Beauty is alive and everlasting.
Languages come and go. They are the dust of the dead.”

And his next thought was that he had been phrasing his ideas very well,
and he went to bed wondering why he could not talk in similar fashion
when he was with Ruth. He was only a schoolboy, with a schoolboy’s
tongue, when he was in her presence.

“Give me time,” he said aloud. “Only give me time.”

Time! Time! Time! was his unending plaint.




CHAPTER XIV.


It was not because of Olney, but in spite of Ruth, and his love for
Ruth, that he finally decided not to take up Latin. His money meant
time. There was so much that was more important than Latin, so many
studies that clamored with imperious voices. And he must write. He must
earn money. He had had no acceptances. Twoscore of manuscripts were
travelling the endless round of the magazines. How did the others do
it? He spent long hours in the free reading-room, going over what
others had written, studying their work eagerly and critically,
comparing it with his own, and wondering, wondering, about the secret
trick they had discovered which enabled them to sell their work.

He was amazed at the immense amount of printed stuff that was dead. No
light, no life, no color, was shot through it. There was no breath of
life in it, and yet it sold, at two cents a word, twenty dollars a
thousand—the newspaper clipping had said so. He was puzzled by
countless short stories, written lightly and cleverly he confessed, but
without vitality or reality. Life was so strange and wonderful, filled
with an immensity of problems, of dreams, and of heroic toils, and yet
these stories dealt only with the commonplaces of life. He felt the
stress and strain of life, its fevers and sweats and wild
insurgences—surely this was the stuff to write about! He wanted to
glorify the leaders of forlorn hopes, the mad lovers, the giants that
fought under stress and strain, amid terror and tragedy, making life
crackle with the strength of their endeavor. And yet the magazine short
stories seemed intent on glorifying the Mr. Butlers, the sordid
dollar-chasers, and the commonplace little love affairs of commonplace
little men and women. Was it because the editors of the magazines were
commonplace? he demanded. Or were they afraid of life, these writers
and editors and readers?

But his chief trouble was that he did not know any editors or writers.
And not merely did he not know any writers, but he did not know anybody
who had ever attempted to write. There was nobody to tell him, to hint
to him, to give him the least word of advice. He began to doubt that
editors were real men. They seemed cogs in a machine. That was what it
was, a machine. He poured his soul into stories, articles, and poems,
and intrusted them to the machine. He folded them just so, put the
proper stamps inside the long envelope along with the manuscript,
sealed the envelope, put more stamps outside, and dropped it into the
mail-box. It travelled across the continent, and after a certain lapse
of time the postman returned him the manuscript in another long
envelope, on the outside of which were the stamps he had enclosed.
There was no human editor at the other end, but a mere cunning
arrangement of cogs that changed the manuscript from one envelope to
another and stuck on the stamps. It was like the slot machines wherein
one dropped pennies, and, with a metallic whirl of machinery had
delivered to him a stick of chewing-gum or a tablet of chocolate. It
depended upon which slot one dropped the penny in, whether he got
chocolate or gum. And so with the editorial machine. One slot brought
checks and the other brought rejection slips. So far he had found only
the latter slot.

It was the rejection slips that completed the horrible machinelikeness
of the process. These slips were printed in stereotyped forms and he
had received hundreds of them—as many as a dozen or more on each of his
earlier manuscripts. If he had received one line, one personal line,
along with one rejection of all his rejections, he would have been
cheered. But not one editor had given that proof of existence. And he
could conclude only that there were no warm human men at the other end,
only mere cogs, well oiled and running beautifully in the machine.

He was a good fighter, whole-souled and stubborn, and he would have
been content to continue feeding the machine for years; but he was
bleeding to death, and not years but weeks would determine the fight.
Each week his board bill brought him nearer destruction, while the
postage on forty manuscripts bled him almost as severely. He no longer
bought books, and he economized in petty ways and sought to delay the
inevitable end; though he did not know how to economize, and brought
the end nearer by a week when he gave his sister Marian five dollars
for a dress.

He struggled in the dark, without advice, without encouragement, and in
the teeth of discouragement. Even Gertrude was beginning to look
askance. At first she had tolerated with sisterly fondness what she
conceived to be his foolishness; but now, out of sisterly solicitude,
she grew anxious. To her it seemed that his foolishness was becoming a
madness. Martin knew this and suffered more keenly from it than from
the open and nagging contempt of Bernard Higginbotham. Martin had faith
in himself, but he was alone in this faith. Not even Ruth had faith.
She had wanted him to devote himself to study, and, though she had not
openly disapproved of his writing, she had never approved.

He had never offered to show her his work. A fastidious delicacy had
prevented him. Besides, she had been studying heavily at the
university, and he felt averse to robbing her of her time. But when she
had taken her degree, she asked him herself to let her see something of
what he had been doing. Martin was elated and diffident. Here was a
judge. She was a bachelor of arts. She had studied literature under
skilled instructors. Perhaps the editors were capable judges, too. But
she would be different from them. She would not hand him a stereotyped
rejection slip, nor would she inform him that lack of preference for
his work did not necessarily imply lack of merit in his work. She would
talk, a warm human being, in her quick, bright way, and, most important
of all, she would catch glimpses of the real Martin Eden. In his work
she would discern what his heart and soul were like, and she would come
to understand something, a little something, of the stuff of his dreams
and the strength of his power.

Martin gathered together a number of carbon copies of his short
stories, hesitated a moment, then added his “Sea Lyrics.” They mounted
their wheels on a late June afternoon and rode for the hills. It was
the second time he had been out with her alone, and as they rode along
through the balmy warmth, just chilled by she sea-breeze to refreshing
coolness, he was profoundly impressed by the fact that it was a very
beautiful and well-ordered world and that it was good to be alive and
to love. They left their wheels by the roadside and climbed to the
brown top of an open knoll where the sunburnt grass breathed a harvest
breath of dry sweetness and content.

“Its work is done,” Martin said, as they seated themselves, she upon
his coat, and he sprawling close to the warm earth. He sniffed the
sweetness of the tawny grass, which entered his brain and set his
thoughts whirling on from the particular to the universal. “It has
achieved its reason for existence,” he went on, patting the dry grass
affectionately. “It quickened with ambition under the dreary downpour
of last winter, fought the violent early spring, flowered, and lured
the insects and the bees, scattered its seeds, squared itself with its
duty and the world, and—”

“Why do you always look at things with such dreadfully practical eyes?”
she interrupted.

“Because I’ve been studying evolution, I guess. It’s only recently that
I got my eyesight, if the truth were told.”

“But it seems to me you lose sight of beauty by being so practical,
that you destroy beauty like the boys who catch butterflies and rub the
down off their beautiful wings.”

He shook his head.

“Beauty has significance, but I never knew its significance before. I
just accepted beauty as something meaningless, as something that was
just beautiful without rhyme or reason. I did not know anything about
beauty. But now I know, or, rather, am just beginning to know. This
grass is more beautiful to me now that I know why it is grass, and all
the hidden chemistry of sun and rain and earth that makes it become
grass. Why, there is romance in the life-history of any grass, yes, and
adventure, too. The very thought of it stirs me. When I think of the
play of force and matter, and all the tremendous struggle of it, I feel
as if I could write an epic on the grass.

“How well you talk,” she said absently, and he noted that she was
looking at him in a searching way.

He was all confusion and embarrassment on the instant, the blood
flushing red on his neck and brow.

“I hope I am learning to talk,” he stammered. “There seems to be so
much in me I want to say. But it is all so big. I can’t find ways to
say what is really in me. Sometimes it seems to me that all the world,
all life, everything, had taken up residence inside of me and was
clamoring for me to be the spokesman. I feel—oh, I can’t describe it—I
feel the bigness of it, but when I speak, I babble like a little child.
It is a great task to transmute feeling and sensation into speech,
written or spoken, that will, in turn, in him who reads or listens,
transmute itself back into the selfsame feeling and sensation. It is a
lordly task. See, I bury my face in the grass, and the breath I draw in
through my nostrils sets me quivering with a thousand thoughts and
fancies. It is a breath of the universe I have breathed. I know song
and laughter, and success and pain, and struggle and death; and I see
visions that arise in my brain somehow out of the scent of the grass,
and I would like to tell them to you, to the world. But how can I? My
tongue is tied. I have tried, by the spoken word, just now, to describe
to you the effect on me of the scent of the grass. But I have not
succeeded. I have no more than hinted in awkward speech. My words seem
gibberish to me. And yet I am stifled with desire to tell. Oh!—” he
threw up his hands with a despairing gesture—“it is impossible! It is
not understandable! It is incommunicable!”

“But you do talk well,” she insisted. “Just think how you have improved
in the short time I have known you. Mr. Butler is a noted public
speaker. He is always asked by the State Committee to go out on stump
during campaign. Yet you talked just as well as he the other night at
dinner. Only he was more controlled. You get too excited; but you will
get over that with practice. Why, you would make a good public speaker.
You can go far—if you want to. You are masterly. You can lead men, I am
sure, and there is no reason why you should not succeed at anything you
set your hand to, just as you have succeeded with grammar. You would
make a good lawyer. You should shine in politics. There is nothing to
prevent you from making as great a success as Mr. Butler has made. And
minus the dyspepsia,” she added with a smile.

They talked on; she, in her gently persistent way, returning always to
the need of thorough grounding in education and to the advantages of
Latin as part of the foundation for any career. She drew her ideal of
the successful man, and it was largely in her father’s image, with a
few unmistakable lines and touches of color from the image of Mr.
Butler. He listened eagerly, with receptive ears, lying on his back and
looking up and joying in each movement of her lips as she talked. But
his brain was not receptive. There was nothing alluring in the pictures
she drew, and he was aware of a dull pain of disappointment and of a
sharper ache of love for her. In all she said there was no mention of
his writing, and the manuscripts he had brought to read lay neglected
on the ground.

At last, in a pause, he glanced at the sun, measured its height above
the horizon, and suggested his manuscripts by picking them up.

“I had forgotten,” she said quickly. “And I am so anxious to hear.”

He read to her a story, one that he flattered himself was among his
very best. He called it “The Wine of Life,” and the wine of it, that
had stolen into his brain when he wrote it, stole into his brain now as
he read it. There was a certain magic in the original conception, and
he had adorned it with more magic of phrase and touch. All the old fire
and passion with which he had written it were reborn in him, and he was
swayed and swept away so that he was blind and deaf to the faults of
it. But it was not so with Ruth. Her trained ear detected the
weaknesses and exaggerations, the overemphasis of the tyro, and she was
instantly aware each time the sentence-rhythm tripped and faltered. She
scarcely noted the rhythm otherwise, except when it became too pompous,
at which moments she was disagreeably impressed with its
amateurishness. That was her final judgment on the story as a
whole—amateurish, though she did not tell him so. Instead, when he had
done, she pointed out the minor flaws and said that she liked the
story.

But he was disappointed. Her criticism was just. He acknowledged that,
but he had a feeling that he was not sharing his work with her for the
purpose of schoolroom correction. The details did not matter. They
could take care of themselves. He could mend them, he could learn to
mend them. Out of life he had captured something big and attempted to
imprison it in the story. It was the big thing out of life he had read
to her, not sentence-structure and semicolons. He wanted her to feel
with him this big thing that was his, that he had seen with his own
eyes, grappled with his own brain, and placed there on the page with
his own hands in printed words. Well, he had failed, was his secret
decision. Perhaps the editors were right. He had felt the big thing,
but he had failed to transmute it. He concealed his disappointment, and
joined so easily with her in her criticism that she did not realize
that deep down in him was running a strong undercurrent of
disagreement.

“This next thing I’ve called ‘The Pot’,” he said, unfolding the
manuscript. “It has been refused by four or five magazines now, but
still I think it is good. In fact, I don’t know what to think of it,
except that I’ve caught something there. Maybe it won’t affect you as
it does me. It’s a short thing—only two thousand words.”

“How dreadful!” she cried, when he had finished. “It is horrible,
unutterably horrible!”

He noted her pale face, her eyes wide and tense, and her clenched
hands, with secret satisfaction. He had succeeded. He had communicated
the stuff of fancy and feeling from out of his brain. It had struck
home. No matter whether she liked it or not, it had gripped her and
mastered her, made her sit there and listen and forget details.

“It is life,” he said, “and life is not always beautiful. And yet,
perhaps because I am strangely made, I find something beautiful there.
It seems to me that the beauty is tenfold enhanced because it is
there—”

“But why couldn’t the poor woman—” she broke in disconnectedly. Then
she left the revolt of her thought unexpressed to cry out: “Oh! It is
degrading! It is not nice! It is nasty!”

For the moment it seemed to him that his heart stood still. _Nasty_! He
had never dreamed it. He had not meant it. The whole sketch stood
before him in letters of fire, and in such blaze of illumination he
sought vainly for nastiness. Then his heart began to beat again. He was
not guilty.

“Why didn’t you select a nice subject?” she was saying. “We know there
are nasty things in the world, but that is no reason—”

She talked on in her indignant strain, but he was not following her. He
was smiling to himself as he looked up into her virginal face, so
innocent, so penetratingly innocent, that its purity seemed always to
enter into him, driving out of him all dross and bathing him in some
ethereal effulgence that was as cool and soft and velvety as starshine.
_We know there are nasty things in the world_! He cuddled to him the
notion of her knowing, and chuckled over it as a love joke. The next
moment, in a flashing vision of multitudinous detail, he sighted the
whole sea of life’s nastiness that he had known and voyaged over and
through, and he forgave her for not understanding the story. It was
through no fault of hers that she could not understand. He thanked God
that she had been born and sheltered to such innocence. But he knew
life, its foulness as well as its fairness, its greatness in spite of
the slime that infested it, and by God he was going to have his say on
it to the world. Saints in heaven—how could they be anything but fair
and pure? No praise to them. But saints in slime—ah, that was the
everlasting wonder! That was what made life worth while. To see moral
grandeur rising out of cesspools of iniquity; to rise himself and first
glimpse beauty, faint and far, through mud-dripping eyes; to see out of
weakness, and frailty, and viciousness, and all abysmal brutishness,
arising strength, and truth, and high spiritual endowment—

He caught a stray sequence of sentences she was uttering.

“The tone of it all is low. And there is so much that is high. Take ‘In
Memoriam.’”

He was impelled to suggest “Locksley Hall,” and would have done so, had
not his vision gripped him again and left him staring at her, the
female of his kind, who, out of the primordial ferment, creeping and
crawling up the vast ladder of life for a thousand thousand centuries,
had emerged on the topmost rung, having become one Ruth, pure, and
fair, and divine, and with power to make him know love, and to aspire
toward purity, and to desire to taste divinity—him, Martin Eden, who,
too, had come up in some amazing fashion from out of the ruck and the
mire and the countless mistakes and abortions of unending creation.
There was the romance, and the wonder, and the glory. There was the
stuff to write, if he could only find speech. Saints in heaven!—They
were only saints and could not help themselves. But he was a man.

“You have strength,” he could hear her saying, “but it is untutored
strength.”

“Like a bull in a china shop,” he suggested, and won a smile.

“And you must develop discrimination. You must consult taste, and
fineness, and tone.”

“I dare too much,” he muttered.

She smiled approbation, and settled herself to listen to another story.

“I don’t know what you’ll make of this,” he said apologetically. “It’s
a funny thing. I’m afraid I got beyond my depth in it, but my
intentions were good. Don’t bother about the little features of it.
Just see if you catch the feel of the big thing in it. It is big, and
it is true, though the chance is large that I have failed to make it
intelligible.”

He read, and as he read he watched her. At last he had reached her, he
thought. She sat without movement, her eyes steadfast upon him,
scarcely breathing, caught up and out of herself, he thought, by the
witchery of the thing he had created. He had entitled the story
“Adventure,” and it was the apotheosis of adventure—not of the
adventure of the storybooks, but of real adventure, the savage
taskmaster, awful of punishment and awful of reward, faithless and
whimsical, demanding terrible patience and heartbreaking days and
nights of toil, offering the blazing sunlight glory or dark death at
the end of thirst and famine or of the long drag and monstrous delirium
of rotting fever, through blood and sweat and stinging insects leading
up by long chains of petty and ignoble contacts to royal culminations
and lordly achievements.

It was this, all of it, and more, that he had put into his story, and
it was this, he believed, that warmed her as she sat and listened. Her
eyes were wide, color was in her pale cheeks, and before he finished it
seemed to him that she was almost panting. Truly, she was warmed; but
she was warmed, not by the story, but by him. She did not think much of
the story; it was Martin’s intensity of power, the old excess of
strength that seemed to pour from his body and on and over her. The
paradox of it was that it was the story itself that was freighted with
his power, that was the channel, for the time being, through which his
strength poured out to her. She was aware only of the strength, and not
of the medium, and when she seemed most carried away by what he had
written, in reality she had been carried away by something quite
foreign to it—by a thought, terrible and perilous, that had formed
itself unsummoned in her brain. She had caught herself wondering what
marriage was like, and the becoming conscious of the waywardness and
ardor of the thought had terrified her. It was unmaidenly. It was not
like her. She had never been tormented by womanhood, and she had lived
in a dreamland of Tennysonian poesy, dense even to the full
significance of that delicate master’s delicate allusions to the
grossnesses that intrude upon the relations of queens and knights. She
had been asleep, always, and now life was thundering imperatively at
all her doors. Mentally she was in a panic to shoot the bolts and drop
the bars into place, while wanton instincts urged her to throw wide her
portals and bid the deliciously strange visitor to enter in.

Martin waited with satisfaction for her verdict. He had no doubt of
what it would be, and he was astounded when he heard her say:

“It is beautiful.”

“It is beautiful,” she repeated, with emphasis, after a pause.

Of course it was beautiful; but there was something more than mere
beauty in it, something more stingingly splendid which had made beauty
its handmaiden. He sprawled silently on the ground, watching the grisly
form of a great doubt rising before him. He had failed. He was
inarticulate. He had seen one of the greatest things in the world, and
he had not expressed it.

“What did you think of the—” He hesitated, abashed at his first attempt
to use a strange word. “Of the _motif_?” he asked.

“It was confused,” she answered. “That is my only criticism in the
large way. I followed the story, but there seemed so much else. It is
too wordy. You clog the action by introducing so much extraneous
material.”

“That was the major _motif_,” he hurriedly explained, “the big
underrunning _motif_, the cosmic and universal thing. I tried to make
it keep time with the story itself, which was only superficial after
all. I was on the right scent, but I guess I did it badly. I did not
succeed in suggesting what I was driving at. But I’ll learn in time.”

She did not follow him. She was a bachelor of arts, but he had gone
beyond her limitations. This she did not comprehend, attributing her
incomprehension to his incoherence.

“You were too voluble,” she said. “But it was beautiful, in places.”

He heard her voice as from far off, for he was debating whether he
would read her the “Sea Lyrics.” He lay in dull despair, while she
watched him searchingly, pondering again upon unsummoned and wayward
thoughts of marriage.

“You want to be famous?” she asked abruptly.

“Yes, a little bit,” he confessed. “That is part of the adventure. It
is not the being famous, but the process of becoming so, that counts.
And after all, to be famous would be, for me, only a means to something
else. I want to be famous very much, for that matter, and for that
reason.”

“For your sake,” he wanted to add, and might have added had she proved
enthusiastic over what he had read to her.

But she was too busy in her mind, carving out a career for him that
would at least be possible, to ask what the ultimate something was
which he had hinted at. There was no career for him in literature. Of
that she was convinced. He had proved it to-day, with his amateurish
and sophomoric productions. He could talk well, but he was incapable of
expressing himself in a literary way. She compared Tennyson, and
Browning, and her favorite prose masters with him, and to his hopeless
discredit. Yet she did not tell him her whole mind. Her strange
interest in him led her to temporize. His desire to write was, after
all, a little weakness which he would grow out of in time. Then he
would devote himself to the more serious affairs of life. And he would
succeed, too. She knew that. He was so strong that he could not fail—if
only he would drop writing.

“I wish you would show me all you write, Mr. Eden,” she said.

He flushed with pleasure. She was interested, that much was sure. And
at least she had not given him a rejection slip. She had called certain
portions of his work beautiful, and that was the first encouragement he
had ever received from any one.

“I will,” he said passionately. “And I promise you, Miss Morse, that I
will make good. I have come far, I know that; and I have far to go, and
I will cover it if I have to do it on my hands and knees.” He held up a
bunch of manuscript. “Here are the ‘Sea Lyrics.’ When you get home,
I’ll turn them over to you to read at your leisure. And you must be
sure to tell me just what you think of them. What I need, you know,
above all things, is criticism. And do, please, be frank with me.”

“I will be perfectly frank,” she promised, with an uneasy conviction
that she had not been frank with him and with a doubt if she could be
quite frank with him the next time.




CHAPTER XV.


“The first battle, fought and finished,” Martin said to the
looking-glass ten days later. “But there will be a second battle, and a
third battle, and battles to the end of time, unless—”

He had not finished the sentence, but looked about the mean little room
and let his eyes dwell sadly upon a heap of returned manuscripts, still
in their long envelopes, which lay in a corner on the floor. He had no
stamps with which to continue them on their travels, and for a week
they had been piling up. More of them would come in on the morrow, and
on the next day, and the next, till they were all in. And he would be
unable to start them out again. He was a month’s rent behind on the
typewriter, which he could not pay, having barely enough for the week’s
board which was due and for the employment office fees.

He sat down and regarded the table thoughtfully. There were ink stains
upon it, and he suddenly discovered that he was fond of it.

“Dear old table,” he said, “I’ve spent some happy hours with you, and
you’ve been a pretty good friend when all is said and done. You never
turned me down, never passed me out a reward-of-unmerit rejection slip,
never complained about working overtime.”

He dropped his arms upon the table and buried his face in them. His
throat was aching, and he wanted to cry. It reminded him of his first
fight, when he was six years old, when he punched away with the tears
running down his cheeks while the other boy, two years his elder, had
beaten and pounded him into exhaustion. He saw the ring of boys,
howling like barbarians as he went down at last, writhing in the throes
of nausea, the blood streaming from his nose and the tears from his
bruised eyes.

“Poor little shaver,” he murmured. “And you’re just as badly licked
now. You’re beaten to a pulp. You’re down and out.”

But the vision of that first fight still lingered under his eyelids,
and as he watched he saw it dissolve and reshape into the series of
fights which had followed. Six months later Cheese-Face (that was the
boy) had whipped him again. But he had blacked Cheese-Face’s eye that
time. That was going some. He saw them all, fight after fight, himself
always whipped and Cheese-Face exulting over him. But he had never run
away. He felt strengthened by the memory of that. He had always stayed
and taken his medicine. Cheese-Face had been a little fiend at
fighting, and had never once shown mercy to him. But he had stayed! He
had stayed with it!

Next, he saw a narrow alley, between ramshackle frame buildings. The
end of the alley was blocked by a one-story brick building, out of
which issued the rhythmic thunder of the presses, running off the first
edition of the _Enquirer_. He was eleven, and Cheese-Face was thirteen,
and they both carried the _Enquirer_. That was why they were there,
waiting for their papers. And, of course, Cheese-Face had picked on him
again, and there was another fight that was indeterminate, because at
quarter to four the door of the press-room was thrown open and the gang
of boys crowded in to fold their papers.

“I’ll lick you to-morrow,” he heard Cheese-Face promise; and he heard
his own voice, piping and trembling with unshed tears, agreeing to be
there on the morrow.

And he had come there the next day, hurrying from school to be there
first, and beating Cheese-Face by two minutes. The other boys said he
was all right, and gave him advice, pointing out his faults as a
scrapper and promising him victory if he carried out their
instructions. The same boys gave Cheese-Face advice, too. How they had
enjoyed the fight! He paused in his recollections long enough to envy
them the spectacle he and Cheese-Face had put up. Then the fight was
on, and it went on, without rounds, for thirty minutes, until the
press-room door was opened.

He watched the youthful apparition of himself, day after day, hurrying
from school to the _Enquirer_ alley. He could not walk very fast. He
was stiff and lame from the incessant fighting. His forearms were black
and blue from wrist to elbow, what of the countless blows he had warded
off, and here and there the tortured flesh was beginning to fester. His
head and arms and shoulders ached, the small of his back ached,—he
ached all over, and his brain was heavy and dazed. He did not play at
school. Nor did he study. Even to sit still all day at his desk, as he
did, was a torment. It seemed centuries since he had begun the round of
daily fights, and time stretched away into a nightmare and infinite
future of daily fights. Why couldn’t Cheese-Face be licked? he often
thought; that would put him, Martin, out of his misery. It never
entered his head to cease fighting, to allow Cheese-Face to whip him.

And so he dragged himself to the _Enquirer_ alley, sick in body and
soul, but learning the long patience, to confront his eternal enemy,
Cheese-Face, who was just as sick as he, and just a bit willing to quit
if it were not for the gang of newsboys that looked on and made pride
painful and necessary. One afternoon, after twenty minutes of desperate
efforts to annihilate each other according to set rules that did not
permit kicking, striking below the belt, nor hitting when one was down,
Cheese-Face, panting for breath and reeling, offered to call it quits.
And Martin, head on arms, thrilled at the picture he caught of himself,
at that moment in the afternoon of long ago, when he reeled and panted
and choked with the blood that ran into his mouth and down his throat
from his cut lips; when he tottered toward Cheese-Face, spitting out a
mouthful of blood so that he could speak, crying out that he would
never quit, though Cheese-Face could give in if he wanted to. And
Cheese-Face did not give in, and the fight went on.

The next day and the next, days without end, witnessed the afternoon
fight. When he put up his arms, each day, to begin, they pained
exquisitely, and the first few blows, struck and received, racked his
soul; after that things grew numb, and he fought on blindly, seeing as
in a dream, dancing and wavering, the large features and burning,
animal-like eyes of Cheese-Face. He concentrated upon that face; all
else about him was a whirling void. There was nothing else in the world
but that face, and he would never know rest, blessed rest, until he had
beaten that face into a pulp with his bleeding knuckles, or until the
bleeding knuckles that somehow belonged to that face had beaten him
into a pulp. And then, one way or the other, he would have rest. But to
quit,—for him, Martin, to quit,—that was impossible!

Came the day when he dragged himself into the _Enquirer_ alley, and
there was no Cheese-Face. Nor did Cheese-Face come. The boys
congratulated him, and told him that he had licked Cheese-Face. But
Martin was not satisfied. He had not licked Cheese-Face, nor had
Cheese-Face licked him. The problem had not been solved. It was not
until afterward that they learned that Cheese-Face’s father had died
suddenly that very day.

Martin skipped on through the years to the night in the nigger heaven
at the Auditorium. He was seventeen and just back from sea. A row
started. Somebody was bullying somebody, and Martin interfered, to be
confronted by Cheese-Face’s blazing eyes.

“I’ll fix you after de show,” his ancient enemy hissed.

Martin nodded. The nigger-heaven bouncer was making his way toward the
disturbance.

“I’ll meet you outside, after the last act,” Martin whispered, the
while his face showed undivided interest in the buck-and-wing dancing
on the stage.

The bouncer glared and went away.

“Got a gang?” he asked Cheese-Face, at the end of the act.

“Sure.”

“Then I got to get one,” Martin announced.

Between the acts he mustered his following—three fellows he knew from
the nail works, a railroad fireman, and half a dozen of the Boo Gang,
along with as many more from the dread Eighteen-and-Market Gang.

When the theatre let out, the two gangs strung along inconspicuously on
opposite sides of the street. When they came to a quiet corner, they
united and held a council of war.

“Eighth Street Bridge is the place,” said a red-headed fellow belonging
to Cheese-Face’s Gang. “You kin fight in the middle, under the electric
light, an’ whichever way the bulls come in we kin sneak the other way.”

“That’s agreeable to me,” Martin said, after consulting with the
leaders of his own gang.

The Eighth Street Bridge, crossing an arm of San Antonio Estuary, was
the length of three city blocks. In the middle of the bridge, and at
each end, were electric lights. No policeman could pass those
end-lights unseen. It was the safe place for the battle that revived
itself under Martin’s eyelids. He saw the two gangs, aggressive and
sullen, rigidly keeping apart from each other and backing their
respective champions; and he saw himself and Cheese-Face stripping. A
short distance away lookouts were set, their task being to watch the
lighted ends of the bridge. A member of the Boo Gang held Martin’s
coat, and shirt, and cap, ready to race with them into safety in case
the police interfered. Martin watched himself go into the centre,
facing Cheese-Face, and he heard himself say, as he held up his hand
warningly:-

“They ain’t no hand-shakin’ in this. Understand? They ain’t nothin’ but
scrap. No throwin’ up the sponge. This is a grudge-fight an’ it’s to a
finish. Understand? Somebody’s goin’ to get licked.”

Cheese-Face wanted to demur,—Martin could see that,—but Cheese-Face’s
old perilous pride was touched before the two gangs.

“Aw, come on,” he replied. “Wot’s the good of chewin’ de rag about it?
I’m wit’ cheh to de finish.”

Then they fell upon each other, like young bulls, in all the glory of
youth, with naked fists, with hatred, with desire to hurt, to maim, to
destroy. All the painful, thousand years’ gains of man in his upward
climb through creation were lost. Only the electric light remained, a
milestone on the path of the great human adventure. Martin and
Cheese-Face were two savages, of the stone age, of the squatting place
and the tree refuge. They sank lower and lower into the muddy abyss,
back into the dregs of the raw beginnings of life, striving blindly and
chemically, as atoms strive, as the star-dust of the heavens strives,
colliding, recoiling, and colliding again and eternally again.

“God! We are animals! Brute-beasts!” Martin muttered aloud, as he
watched the progress of the fight. It was to him, with his splendid
power of vision, like gazing into a kinetoscope. He was both onlooker
and participant. His long months of culture and refinement shuddered at
the sight; then the present was blotted out of his consciousness and
the ghosts of the past possessed him, and he was Martin Eden, just
returned from sea and fighting Cheese-Face on the Eighth Street Bridge.
He suffered and toiled and sweated and bled, and exulted when his naked
knuckles smashed home.

They were twin whirlwinds of hatred, revolving about each other
monstrously. The time passed, and the two hostile gangs became very
quiet. They had never witnessed such intensity of ferocity, and they
were awed by it. The two fighters were greater brutes than they. The
first splendid velvet edge of youth and condition wore off, and they
fought more cautiously and deliberately. There had been no advantage
gained either way. “It’s anybody’s fight,” Martin heard some one
saying. Then he followed up a feint, right and left, was fiercely
countered, and felt his cheek laid open to the bone. No bare knuckle
had done that. He heard mutters of amazement at the ghastly damage
wrought, and was drenched with his own blood. But he gave no sign. He
became immensely wary, for he was wise with knowledge of the low
cunning and foul vileness of his kind. He watched and waited, until he
feigned a wild rush, which he stopped midway, for he had seen the glint
of metal.

“Hold up yer hand!” he screamed. “Them’s brass knuckles, an’ you hit me
with ’em!”

Both gangs surged forward, growling and snarling. In a second there
would be a free-for-all fight, and he would be robbed of his vengeance.
He was beside himself.

“You guys keep out!” he screamed hoarsely. “Understand? Say, d’ye
understand?”

They shrank away from him. They were brutes, but he was the arch-brute,
a thing of terror that towered over them and dominated them.

“This is my scrap, an’ they ain’t goin’ to be no buttin’ in. Gimme them
knuckles.”

Cheese-Face, sobered and a bit frightened, surrendered the foul weapon.

“You passed ’em to him, you red-head sneakin’ in behind the push
there,” Martin went on, as he tossed the knuckles into the water. “I
seen you, an’ I was wonderin’ what you was up to. If you try anything
like that again, I’ll beat cheh to death. Understand?”

They fought on, through exhaustion and beyond, to exhaustion
immeasurable and inconceivable, until the crowd of brutes, its
blood-lust sated, terrified by what it saw, begged them impartially to
cease. And Cheese-Face, ready to drop and die, or to stay on his legs
and die, a grisly monster out of whose features all likeness to
Cheese-Face had been beaten, wavered and hesitated; but Martin sprang
in and smashed him again and again.

Next, after a seeming century or so, with Cheese-Face weakening fast,
in a mix-up of blows there was a loud snap, and Martin’s right arm
dropped to his side. It was a broken bone. Everybody heard it and knew;
and Cheese-Face knew, rushing like a tiger in the other’s extremity and
raining blow on blow. Martin’s gang surged forward to interfere. Dazed
by the rapid succession of blows, Martin warned them back with vile and
earnest curses sobbed out and groaned in ultimate desolation and
despair.

He punched on, with his left hand only, and as he punched, doggedly,
only half-conscious, as from a remote distance he heard murmurs of fear
in the gangs, and one who said with shaking voice: “This ain’t a scrap,
fellows. It’s murder, an’ we ought to stop it.”

But no one stopped it, and he was glad, punching on wearily and
endlessly with his one arm, battering away at a bloody something before
him that was not a face but a horror, an oscillating, hideous,
gibbering, nameless thing that persisted before his wavering vision and
would not go away. And he punched on and on, slower and slower, as the
last shreds of vitality oozed from him, through centuries and aeons and
enormous lapses of time, until, in a dim way, he became aware that the
nameless thing was sinking, slowly sinking down to the rough
board-planking of the bridge. And the next moment he was standing over
it, staggering and swaying on shaky legs, clutching at the air for
support, and saying in a voice he did not recognize:-

“D’ye want any more? Say, d’ye want any more?”

He was still saying it, over and over,—demanding, entreating,
threatening, to know if it wanted any more,—when he felt the fellows of
his gang laying hands on him, patting him on the back and trying to put
his coat on him. And then came a sudden rush of blackness and oblivion.

The tin alarm-clock on the table ticked on, but Martin Eden, his face
buried on his arms, did not hear it. He heard nothing. He did not
think. So absolutely had he relived life that he had fainted just as he
fainted years before on the Eighth Street Bridge. For a full minute the
blackness and the blankness endured. Then, like one from the dead, he
sprang upright, eyes flaming, sweat pouring down his face, shouting:-

“I licked you, Cheese-Face! It took me eleven years, but I licked you!”

His knees were trembling under him, he felt faint, and he staggered
back to the bed, sinking down and sitting on the edge of it. He was
still in the clutch of the past. He looked about the room, perplexed,
alarmed, wondering where he was, until he caught sight of the pile of
manuscripts in the corner. Then the wheels of memory slipped ahead
through four years of time, and he was aware of the present, of the
books he had opened and the universe he had won from their pages, of
his dreams and ambitions, and of his love for a pale wraith of a girl,
sensitive and sheltered and ethereal, who would die of horror did she
witness but one moment of what he had just lived through—one moment of
all the muck of life through which he had waded.

He arose to his feet and confronted himself in the looking-glass.

“And so you arise from the mud, Martin Eden,” he said solemnly. “And
you cleanse your eyes in a great brightness, and thrust your shoulders
among the stars, doing what all life has done, letting the ‘ape and
tiger die’ and wresting highest heritage from all powers that be.”

He looked more closely at himself and laughed.

“A bit of hysteria and melodrama, eh?” he queried. “Well, never mind.
You licked Cheese-Face, and you’ll lick the editors if it takes twice
eleven years to do it in. You can’t stop here. You’ve got to go on.
It’s to a finish, you know.”




CHAPTER XVI.


The alarm-clock went off, jerking Martin out of sleep with a suddenness
that would have given headache to one with less splendid constitution.
Though he slept soundly, he awoke instantly, like a cat, and he awoke
eagerly, glad that the five hours of unconsciousness were gone. He
hated the oblivion of sleep. There was too much to do, too much of life
to live. He grudged every moment of life sleep robbed him of, and
before the clock had ceased its clattering he was head and ears in the
washbasin and thrilling to the cold bite of the water.

But he did not follow his regular programme. There was no unfinished
story waiting his hand, no new story demanding articulation. He had
studied late, and it was nearly time for breakfast. He tried to read a
chapter in Fiske, but his brain was restless and he closed the book.
To-day witnessed the beginning of the new battle, wherein for some time
there would be no writing. He was aware of a sadness akin to that with
which one leaves home and family. He looked at the manuscripts in the
corner. That was it. He was going away from them, his pitiful,
dishonored children that were welcome nowhere. He went over and began
to rummage among them, reading snatches here and there, his favorite
portions. “The Pot” he honored with reading aloud, as he did
“Adventure.” “Joy,” his latest-born, completed the day before and
tossed into the corner for lack of stamps, won his keenest approbation.

“I can’t understand,” he murmured. “Or maybe it’s the editors who can’t
understand. There’s nothing wrong with that. They publish worse every
month. Everything they publish is worse—nearly everything, anyway.”

After breakfast he put the type-writer in its case and carried it down
into Oakland.

“I owe a month on it,” he told the clerk in the store. “But you tell
the manager I’m going to work and that I’ll be in in a month or so and
straighten up.”

He crossed on the ferry to San Francisco and made his way to an
employment office. “Any kind of work, no trade,” he told the agent; and
was interrupted by a new-comer, dressed rather foppishly, as some
workingmen dress who have instincts for finer things. The agent shook
his head despondently.

“Nothin’ doin’ eh?” said the other. “Well, I got to get somebody
to-day.”

He turned and stared at Martin, and Martin, staring back, noted the
puffed and discolored face, handsome and weak, and knew that he had
been making a night of it.

“Lookin’ for a job?” the other queried. “What can you do?”

“Hard labor, sailorizing, run a type-writer, no shorthand, can sit on a
horse, willing to do anything and tackle anything,” was the answer.

The other nodded.

“Sounds good to me. My name’s Dawson, Joe Dawson, an’ I’m tryin’ to
scare up a laundryman.”

“Too much for me.” Martin caught an amusing glimpse of himself ironing
fluffy white things that women wear. But he had taken a liking to the
other, and he added: “I might do the plain washing. I learned that much
at sea.” Joe Dawson thought visibly for a moment.

“Look here, let’s get together an’ frame it up. Willin’ to listen?”

Martin nodded.

“This is a small laundry, up country, belongs to Shelly Hot
Springs,—hotel, you know. Two men do the work, boss and assistant. I’m
the boss. You don’t work for me, but you work under me. Think you’d be
willin’ to learn?”

Martin paused to think. The prospect was alluring. A few months of it,
and he would have time to himself for study. He could work hard and
study hard.

“Good grub an’ a room to yourself,” Joe said.

That settled it. A room to himself where he could burn the midnight oil
unmolested.

“But work like hell,” the other added.

Martin caressed his swelling shoulder-muscles significantly. “That came
from hard work.”

“Then let’s get to it.” Joe held his hand to his head for a moment.
“Gee, but it’s a stem-winder. Can hardly see. I went down the line last
night—everything—everything. Here’s the frame-up. The wages for two is
a hundred and board. I’ve ben drawin’ down sixty, the second man forty.
But he knew the biz. You’re green. If I break you in, I’ll be doing
plenty of your work at first. Suppose you begin at thirty, an’ work up
to the forty. I’ll play fair. Just as soon as you can do your share you
get the forty.”

“I’ll go you,” Martin announced, stretching out his hand, which the
other shook. “Any advance?—for rail-road ticket and extras?”

“I blew it in,” was Joe’s sad answer, with another reach at his aching
head. “All I got is a return ticket.”

“And I’m broke—when I pay my board.”

“Jump it,” Joe advised.

“Can’t. Owe it to my sister.”

Joe whistled a long, perplexed whistle, and racked his brains to little
purpose.

“I’ve got the price of the drinks,” he said desperately. “Come on, an’
mebbe we’ll cook up something.”

Martin declined.

“Water-wagon?”

This time Martin nodded, and Joe lamented, “Wish I was.”

“But I somehow just can’t,” he said in extenuation. “After I’ve ben
workin’ like hell all week I just got to booze up. If I didn’t, I’d cut
my throat or burn up the premises. But I’m glad you’re on the wagon.
Stay with it.”

Martin knew of the enormous gulf between him and this man—the gulf the
books had made; but he found no difficulty in crossing back over that
gulf. He had lived all his life in the working-class world, and the
_camaraderie_ of labor was second nature with him. He solved the
difficulty of transportation that was too much for the other’s aching
head. He would send his trunk up to Shelly Hot Springs on Joe’s ticket.
As for himself, there was his wheel. It was seventy miles, and he could
ride it on Sunday and be ready for work Monday morning. In the meantime
he would go home and pack up. There was no one to say good-by to. Ruth
and her whole family were spending the long summer in the Sierras, at
Lake Tahoe.

He arrived at Shelly Hot Springs, tired and dusty, on Sunday night. Joe
greeted him exuberantly. With a wet towel bound about his aching brow,
he had been at work all day.

“Part of last week’s washin’ mounted up, me bein’ away to get you,” he
explained. “Your box arrived all right. It’s in your room. But it’s a
hell of a thing to call a trunk. An’ what’s in it? Gold bricks?”

Joe sat on the bed while Martin unpacked. The box was a packing-case
for breakfast food, and Mr. Higginbotham had charged him half a dollar
for it. Two rope handles, nailed on by Martin, had technically
transformed it into a trunk eligible for the baggage-car. Joe watched,
with bulging eyes, a few shirts and several changes of underclothes
come out of the box, followed by books, and more books.

“Books clean to the bottom?” he asked.

Martin nodded, and went on arranging the books on a kitchen table which
served in the room in place of a wash-stand.

“Gee!” Joe exploded, then waited in silence for the deduction to arise
in his brain. At last it came.

“Say, you don’t care for the girls—much?” he queried.

“No,” was the answer. “I used to chase a lot before I tackled the
books. But since then there’s no time.”

“And there won’t be any time here. All you can do is work an’ sleep.”

Martin thought of his five hours’ sleep a night, and smiled. The room
was situated over the laundry and was in the same building with the
engine that pumped water, made electricity, and ran the laundry
machinery. The engineer, who occupied the adjoining room, dropped in to
meet the new hand and helped Martin rig up an electric bulb, on an
extension wire, so that it travelled along a stretched cord from over
the table to the bed.

The next morning, at quarter-past six, Martin was routed out for a
quarter-to-seven breakfast. There happened to be a bath-tub for the
servants in the laundry building, and he electrified Joe by taking a
cold bath.

“Gee, but you’re a hummer!” Joe announced, as they sat down to
breakfast in a corner of the hotel kitchen.

With them was the engineer, the gardener, and the assistant gardener,
and two or three men from the stable. They ate hurriedly and gloomily,
with but little conversation, and as Martin ate and listened he
realized how far he had travelled from their status. Their small mental
caliber was depressing to him, and he was anxious to get away from
them. So he bolted his breakfast, a sickly, sloppy affair, as rapidly
as they, and heaved a sigh of relief when he passed out through the
kitchen door.

It was a perfectly appointed, small steam laundry, wherein the most
modern machinery did everything that was possible for machinery to do.
Martin, after a few instructions, sorted the great heaps of soiled
clothes, while Joe started the masher and made up fresh supplies of
soft-soap, compounded of biting chemicals that compelled him to swathe
his mouth and nostrils and eyes in bath-towels till he resembled a
mummy. Finished the sorting, Martin lent a hand in wringing the
clothes. This was done by dumping them into a spinning receptacle that
went at a rate of a few thousand revolutions a minute, tearing the
water from the clothes by centrifugal force. Then Martin began to
alternate between the dryer and the wringer, between times “shaking
out” socks and stockings. By the afternoon, one feeding and one
stacking up, they were running socks and stockings through the mangle
while the irons were heating. Then it was hot irons and underclothes
till six o’clock, at which time Joe shook his head dubiously.

“Way behind,” he said. “Got to work after supper.” And after supper
they worked until ten o’clock, under the blazing electric lights, until
the last piece of under-clothing was ironed and folded away in the
distributing room. It was a hot California night, and though the
windows were thrown wide, the room, with its red-hot ironing-stove, was
a furnace. Martin and Joe, down to undershirts, bare armed, sweated and
panted for air.

“Like trimming cargo in the tropics,” Martin said, when they went
upstairs.

“You’ll do,” Joe answered. “You take hold like a good fellow. If you
keep up the pace, you’ll be on thirty dollars only one month. The
second month you’ll be gettin’ your forty. But don’t tell me you never
ironed before. I know better.”

“Never ironed a rag in my life, honestly, until to-day,” Martin
protested.

He was surprised at his weariness when he got into his room, forgetful
of the fact that he had been on his feet and working without let up for
fourteen hours. He set the alarm clock at six, and measured back five
hours to one o’clock. He could read until then. Slipping off his shoes,
to ease his swollen feet, he sat down at the table with his books. He
opened Fiske, where he had left off to read. But he found trouble and
began to read it through a second time. Then he awoke, in pain from his
stiffened muscles and chilled by the mountain wind that had begun to
blow in through the window. He looked at the clock. It marked two. He
had been asleep four hours. He pulled off his clothes and crawled into
bed, where he was asleep the moment after his head touched the pillow.

Tuesday was a day of similar unremitting toil. The speed with which Joe
worked won Martin’s admiration. Joe was a dozen of demons for work. He
was keyed up to concert pitch, and there was never a moment in the long
day when he was not fighting for moments. He concentrated himself upon
his work and upon how to save time, pointing out to Martin where he did
in five motions what could be done in three, or in three motions what
could be done in two. “Elimination of waste motion,” Martin phrased it
as he watched and patterned after. He was a good workman himself, quick
and deft, and it had always been a point of pride with him that no man
should do any of his work for him or outwork him. As a result, he
concentrated with a similar singleness of purpose, greedily snapping up
the hints and suggestions thrown out by his working mate. He “rubbed
out” collars and cuffs, rubbing the starch out from between the double
thicknesses of linen so that there would be no blisters when it came to
the ironing, and doing it at a pace that elicited Joe’s praise.

There was never an interval when something was not at hand to be done.
Joe waited for nothing, waited on nothing, and went on the jump from
task to task. They starched two hundred white shirts, with a single
gathering movement seizing a shirt so that the wristbands, neckband,
yoke, and bosom protruded beyond the circling right hand. At the same
moment the left hand held up the body of the shirt so that it would not
enter the starch, and at the same moment the right hand dipped into the
starch—starch so hot that, in order to wring it out, their hands had to
thrust, and thrust continually, into a bucket of cold water. And that
night they worked till half-past ten, dipping “fancy starch”—all the
frilled and airy, delicate wear of ladies.

“Me for the tropics and no clothes,” Martin laughed.

“And me out of a job,” Joe answered seriously. “I don’t know nothin’
but laundrying.”

“And you know it well.”

“I ought to. Began in the Contra Costa in Oakland when I was eleven,
shakin’ out for the mangle. That was eighteen years ago, an’ I’ve never
done a tap of anything else. But this job is the fiercest I ever had.
Ought to be one more man on it at least. We work to-morrow night.
Always run the mangle Wednesday nights—collars an’ cuffs.”

Martin set his alarm, drew up to the table, and opened Fiske. He did
not finish the first paragraph. The lines blurred and ran together and
his head nodded. He walked up and down, batting his head savagely with
his fists, but he could not conquer the numbness of sleep. He propped
the book before him, and propped his eyelids with his fingers, and fell
asleep with his eyes wide open. Then he surrendered, and, scarcely
conscious of what he did, got off his clothes and into bed. He slept
seven hours of heavy, animal-like sleep, and awoke by the alarm,
feeling that he had not had enough.

“Doin’ much readin’?” Joe asked.

Martin shook his head.

“Never mind. We got to run the mangle to-night, but Thursday we’ll
knock off at six. That’ll give you a chance.”

Martin washed woollens that day, by hand, in a large barrel, with
strong soft-soap, by means of a hub from a wagon wheel, mounted on a
plunger-pole that was attached to a spring-pole overhead.

“My invention,” Joe said proudly. “Beats a washboard an’ your knuckles,
and, besides, it saves at least fifteen minutes in the week, an’
fifteen minutes ain’t to be sneezed at in this shebang.”

Running the collars and cuffs through the mangle was also Joe’s idea.
That night, while they toiled on under the electric lights, he
explained it.

“Something no laundry ever does, except this one. An’ I got to do it if
I’m goin’ to get done Saturday afternoon at three o’clock. But I know
how, an’ that’s the difference. Got to have right heat, right pressure,
and run ’em through three times. Look at that!” He held a cuff aloft.
“Couldn’t do it better by hand or on a tiler.”

Thursday, Joe was in a rage. A bundle of extra “fancy starch” had come
in.

“I’m goin’ to quit,” he announced. “I won’t stand for it. I’m goin’ to
quit it cold. What’s the good of me workin’ like a slave all week,
a-savin’ minutes, an’ them a-comin’ an’ ringin’ in fancy-starch extras
on me? This is a free country, an’ I’m to tell that fat Dutchman what I
think of him. An’ I won’t tell ’m in French. Plain United States is
good enough for me. Him a-ringin’ in fancy starch extras!”

“We got to work to-night,” he said the next moment, reversing his
judgment and surrendering to fate.

And Martin did no reading that night. He had seen no daily paper all
week, and, strangely to him, felt no desire to see one. He was not
interested in the news. He was too tired and jaded to be interested in
anything, though he planned to leave Saturday afternoon, if they
finished at three, and ride on his wheel to Oakland. It was seventy
miles, and the same distance back on Sunday afternoon would leave him
anything but rested for the second week’s work. It would have been
easier to go on the train, but the round trip was two dollars and a
half, and he was intent on saving money.




CHAPTER XVII.


Martin learned to do many things. In the course of the first week, in
one afternoon, he and Joe accounted for the two hundred white shirts.
Joe ran the tiler, a machine wherein a hot iron was hooked on a steel
string which furnished the pressure. By this means he ironed the yoke,
wristbands, and neckband, setting the latter at right angles to the
shirt, and put the glossy finish on the bosom. As fast as he finished
them, he flung the shirts on a rack between him and Martin, who caught
them up and “backed” them. This task consisted of ironing all the
unstarched portions of the shirts.

It was exhausting work, carried on, hour after hour, at top speed. Out
on the broad verandas of the hotel, men and women, in cool white,
sipped iced drinks and kept their circulation down. But in the laundry
the air was sizzling. The huge stove roared red hot and white hot,
while the irons, moving over the damp cloth, sent up clouds of steam.
The heat of these irons was different from that used by housewives. An
iron that stood the ordinary test of a wet finger was too cold for Joe
and Martin, and such test was useless. They went wholly by holding the
irons close to their cheeks, gauging the heat by some secret mental
process that Martin admired but could not understand. When the fresh
irons proved too hot, they hooked them on iron rods and dipped them
into cold water. This again required a precise and subtle judgment. A
fraction of a second too long in the water and the fine and silken edge
of the proper heat was lost, and Martin found time to marvel at the
accuracy he developed—an automatic accuracy, founded upon criteria that
were machine-like and unerring.

But there was little time in which to marvel. All Martin’s
consciousness was concentrated in the work. Ceaselessly active, head
and hand, an intelligent machine, all that constituted him a man was
devoted to furnishing that intelligence. There was no room in his brain
for the universe and its mighty problems. All the broad and spacious
corridors of his mind were closed and hermetically sealed. The echoing
chamber of his soul was a narrow room, a conning tower, whence were
directed his arm and shoulder muscles, his ten nimble fingers, and the
swift-moving iron along its steaming path in broad, sweeping strokes,
just so many strokes and no more, just so far with each stroke and not
a fraction of an inch farther, rushing along interminable sleeves,
sides, backs, and tails, and tossing the finished shirts, without
rumpling, upon the receiving frame. And even as his hurrying soul
tossed, it was reaching for another shirt. This went on, hour after
hour, while outside all the world swooned under the overhead California
sun. But there was no swooning in that superheated room. The cool
guests on the verandas needed clean linen.

The sweat poured from Martin. He drank enormous quantities of water,
but so great was the heat of the day and of his exertions, that the
water sluiced through the interstices of his flesh and out at all his
pores. Always, at sea, except at rare intervals, the work he performed
had given him ample opportunity to commune with himself. The master of
the ship had been lord of Martin’s time; but here the manager of the
hotel was lord of Martin’s thoughts as well. He had no thoughts save
for the nerve-racking, body-destroying toil. Outside of that it was
impossible to think. He did not know that he loved Ruth. She did not
even exist, for his driven soul had no time to remember her. It was
only when he crawled to bed at night, or to breakfast in the morning,
that she asserted herself to him in fleeting memories.

“This is hell, ain’t it?” Joe remarked once.

Martin nodded, but felt a rasp of irritation. The statement had been
obvious and unnecessary. They did not talk while they worked.
Conversation threw them out of their stride, as it did this time,
compelling Martin to miss a stroke of his iron and to make two extra
motions before he caught his stride again.

On Friday morning the washer ran. Twice a week they had to put through
hotel linen,—the sheets, pillow-slips, spreads, table-cloths, and
napkins. This finished, they buckled down to “fancy starch.” It was
slow work, fastidious and delicate, and Martin did not learn it so
readily. Besides, he could not take chances. Mistakes were disastrous.

“See that,” Joe said, holding up a filmy corset-cover that he could
have crumpled from view in one hand. “Scorch that an’ it’s twenty
dollars out of your wages.”

So Martin did not scorch that, and eased down on his muscular tension,
though nervous tension rose higher than ever, and he listened
sympathetically to the other’s blasphemies as he toiled and suffered
over the beautiful things that women wear when they do not have to do
their own laundrying. “Fancy starch” was Martin’s nightmare, and it was
Joe’s, too. It was “fancy starch” that robbed them of their hard-won
minutes. They toiled at it all day. At seven in the evening they broke
off to run the hotel linen through the mangle. At ten o’clock, while
the hotel guests slept, the two laundrymen sweated on at “fancy starch”
till midnight, till one, till two. At half-past two they knocked off.

Saturday morning it was “fancy starch,” and odds and ends, and at three
in the afternoon the week’s work was done.

“You ain’t a-goin’ to ride them seventy miles into Oakland on top of
this?” Joe demanded, as they sat on the stairs and took a triumphant
smoke.

“Got to,” was the answer.

“What are you goin’ for?—a girl?”

“No; to save two and a half on the railroad ticket. I want to renew
some books at the library.”

“Why don’t you send ’em down an’ up by express? That’ll cost only a
quarter each way.”

Martin considered it.

“An’ take a rest to-morrow,” the other urged. “You need it. I know I
do. I’m plumb tuckered out.”

He looked it. Indomitable, never resting, fighting for seconds and
minutes all week, circumventing delays and crushing down obstacles, a
fount of resistless energy, a high-driven human motor, a demon for
work, now that he had accomplished the week’s task he was in a state of
collapse. He was worn and haggard, and his handsome face drooped in
lean exhaustion. He pulled his cigarette spiritlessly, and his voice
was peculiarly dead and monotonous. All the snap and fire had gone out
of him. His triumph seemed a sorry one.

“An’ next week we got to do it all over again,” he said sadly. “An’
what’s the good of it all, hey? Sometimes I wish I was a hobo. They
don’t work, an’ they get their livin’. Gee! I wish I had a glass of
beer; but I can’t get up the gumption to go down to the village an’ get
it. You’ll stay over, an’ send your books down by express, or else
you’re a damn fool.”

“But what can I do here all day Sunday?” Martin asked.

“Rest. You don’t know how tired you are. Why, I’m that tired Sunday I
can’t even read the papers. I was sick once—typhoid. In the hospital
two months an’ a half. Didn’t do a tap of work all that time. It was
beautiful.”

“It was beautiful,” he repeated dreamily, a minute later.

Martin took a bath, after which he found that the head laundryman had
disappeared. Most likely he had gone for a glass of beer Martin
decided, but the half-mile walk down to the village to find out seemed
a long journey to him. He lay on his bed with his shoes off, trying to
make up his mind. He did not reach out for a book. He was too tired to
feel sleepy, and he lay, scarcely thinking, in a semi-stupor of
weariness, until it was time for supper. Joe did not appear for that
function, and when Martin heard the gardener remark that most likely he
was ripping the slats off the bar, Martin understood. He went to bed
immediately afterward, and in the morning decided that he was greatly
rested. Joe being still absent, Martin procured a Sunday paper and lay
down in a shady nook under the trees. The morning passed, he knew not
how. He did not sleep, nobody disturbed him, and he did not finish the
paper. He came back to it in the afternoon, after dinner, and fell
asleep over it.

So passed Sunday, and Monday morning he was hard at work, sorting
clothes, while Joe, a towel bound tightly around his head, with groans
and blasphemies, was running the washer and mixing soft-soap.

“I simply can’t help it,” he explained. “I got to drink when Saturday
night comes around.”

Another week passed, a great battle that continued under the electric
lights each night and that culminated on Saturday afternoon at three
o’clock, when Joe tasted his moment of wilted triumph and then drifted
down to the village to forget. Martin’s Sunday was the same as before.
He slept in the shade of the trees, toiled aimlessly through the
newspaper, and spent long hours lying on his back, doing nothing,
thinking nothing. He was too dazed to think, though he was aware that
he did not like himself. He was self-repelled, as though he had
undergone some degradation or was intrinsically foul. All that was
god-like in him was blotted out. The spur of ambition was blunted; he
had no vitality with which to feel the prod of it. He was dead. His
soul seemed dead. He was a beast, a work-beast. He saw no beauty in the
sunshine sifting down through the green leaves, nor did the azure vault
of the sky whisper as of old and hint of cosmic vastness and secrets
trembling to disclosure. Life was intolerably dull and stupid, and its
taste was bad in his mouth. A black screen was drawn across his mirror
of inner vision, and fancy lay in a darkened sick-room where entered no
ray of light. He envied Joe, down in the village, rampant, tearing the
slats off the bar, his brain gnawing with maggots, exulting in maudlin
ways over maudlin things, fantastically and gloriously drunk and
forgetful of Monday morning and the week of deadening toil to come.

A third week went by, and Martin loathed himself, and loathed life. He
was oppressed by a sense of failure. There was reason for the editors
refusing his stuff. He could see that clearly now, and laugh at himself
and the dreams he had dreamed. Ruth returned his “Sea Lyrics” by mail.
He read her letter apathetically. She did her best to say how much she
liked them and that they were beautiful. But she could not lie, and she
could not disguise the truth from herself. She knew they were failures,
and he read her disapproval in every perfunctory and unenthusiastic
line of her letter. And she was right. He was firmly convinced of it as
he read the poems over. Beauty and wonder had departed from him, and as
he read the poems he caught himself puzzling as to what he had had in
mind when he wrote them. His audacities of phrase struck him as
grotesque, his felicities of expression were monstrosities, and
everything was absurd, unreal, and impossible. He would have burned the
“Sea Lyrics” on the spot, had his will been strong enough to set them
aflame. There was the engine-room, but the exertion of carrying them to
the furnace was not worth while. All his exertion was used in washing
other persons’ clothes. He did not have any left for private affairs.

He resolved that when Sunday came he would pull himself together and
answer Ruth’s letter. But Saturday afternoon, after work was finished
and he had taken a bath, the desire to forget overpowered him. “I guess
I’ll go down and see how Joe’s getting on,” was the way he put it to
himself; and in the same moment he knew that he lied. But he did not
have the energy to consider the lie. If he had had the energy, he would
have refused to consider the lie, because he wanted to forget. He
started for the village slowly and casually, increasing his pace in
spite of himself as he neared the saloon.

“I thought you was on the water-wagon,” was Joe’s greeting.

Martin did not deign to offer excuses, but called for whiskey, filling
his own glass brimming before he passed the bottle.

“Don’t take all night about it,” he said roughly.

The other was dawdling with the bottle, and Martin refused to wait for
him, tossing the glass off in a gulp and refilling it.

“Now, I can wait for you,” he said grimly; “but hurry up.”

Joe hurried, and they drank together.

“The work did it, eh?” Joe queried.

Martin refused to discuss the matter.

“It’s fair hell, I know,” the other went on, “but I kind of hate to see
you come off the wagon, Mart. Well, here’s how!”

Martin drank on silently, biting out his orders and invitations and
awing the barkeeper, an effeminate country youngster with watery blue
eyes and hair parted in the middle.

“It’s something scandalous the way they work us poor devils,” Joe was
remarking. “If I didn’t bowl up, I’d break loose an’ burn down the
shebang. My bowlin’ up is all that saves ’em, I can tell you that.”

But Martin made no answer. A few more drinks, and in his brain he felt
the maggots of intoxication beginning to crawl. Ah, it was living, the
first breath of life he had breathed in three weeks. His dreams came
back to him. Fancy came out of the darkened room and lured him on, a
thing of flaming brightness. His mirror of vision was silver-clear, a
flashing, dazzling palimpsest of imagery. Wonder and beauty walked with
him, hand in hand, and all power was his. He tried to tell it to Joe,
but Joe had visions of his own, infallible schemes whereby he would
escape the slavery of laundry-work and become himself the owner of a
great steam laundry.

“I tell yeh, Mart, they won’t be no kids workin’ in my laundry—not on
yer life. An’ they won’t be no workin’ a livin’ soul after six P.M. You
hear me talk! They’ll be machinery enough an’ hands enough to do it all
in decent workin’ hours, an’ Mart, s’help me, I’ll make yeh
superintendent of the shebang—the whole of it, all of it. Now here’s
the scheme. I get on the water-wagon an’ save my money for two
years—save an’ then—”

But Martin turned away, leaving him to tell it to the barkeeper, until
that worthy was called away to furnish drinks to two farmers who,
coming in, accepted Martin’s invitation. Martin dispensed royal
largess, inviting everybody up, farm-hands, a stableman, and the
gardener’s assistant from the hotel, the barkeeper, and the furtive
hobo who slid in like a shadow and like a shadow hovered at the end of
the bar.




CHAPTER XVIII.


Monday morning, Joe groaned over the first truck load of clothes to the
washer.

“I say,” he began.

“Don’t talk to me,” Martin snarled.

“I’m sorry, Joe,” he said at noon, when they knocked off for dinner.

Tears came into the other’s eyes.

“That’s all right, old man,” he said. “We’re in hell, an’ we can’t help
ourselves. An’, you know, I kind of like you a whole lot. That’s what
made it—hurt. I cottoned to you from the first.”

Martin shook his hand.

“Let’s quit,” Joe suggested. “Let’s chuck it, an’ go hoboin’. I ain’t
never tried it, but it must be dead easy. An’ nothin’ to do. Just think
of it, nothin’ to do. I was sick once, typhoid, in the hospital, an’ it
was beautiful. I wish I’d get sick again.”

The week dragged on. The hotel was full, and extra “fancy starch”
poured in upon them. They performed prodigies of valor. They fought
late each night under the electric lights, bolted their meals, and even
got in a half hour’s work before breakfast. Martin no longer took his
cold baths. Every moment was drive, drive, drive, and Joe was the
masterful shepherd of moments, herding them carefully, never losing
one, counting them over like a miser counting gold, working on in a
frenzy, toil-mad, a feverish machine, aided ably by that other machine
that thought of itself as once having been one Martin Eden, a man.

But it was only at rare moments that Martin was able to think. The
house of thought was closed, its windows boarded up, and he was its
shadowy caretaker. He was a shadow. Joe was right. They were both
shadows, and this was the unending limbo of toil. Or was it a dream?
Sometimes, in the steaming, sizzling heat, as he swung the heavy irons
back and forth over the white garments, it came to him that it was a
dream. In a short while, or maybe after a thousand years or so, he
would awake, in his little room with the ink-stained table, and take up
his writing where he had left off the day before. Or maybe that was a
dream, too, and the awakening would be the changing of the watches,
when he would drop down out of his bunk in the lurching forecastle and
go up on deck, under the tropic stars, and take the wheel and feel the
cool tradewind blowing through his flesh.

Came Saturday and its hollow victory at three o’clock.

“Guess I’ll go down an’ get a glass of beer,” Joe said, in the queer,
monotonous tones that marked his week-end collapse.

Martin seemed suddenly to wake up. He opened the kit bag and oiled his
wheel, putting graphite on the chain and adjusting the bearings. Joe
was halfway down to the saloon when Martin passed by, bending low over
the handle-bars, his legs driving the ninety-six gear with rhythmic
strength, his face set for seventy miles of road and grade and dust. He
slept in Oakland that night, and on Sunday covered the seventy miles
back. And on Monday morning, weary, he began the new week’s work, but
he had kept sober.

A fifth week passed, and a sixth, during which he lived and toiled as a
machine, with just a spark of something more in him, just a glimmering
bit of soul, that compelled him, at each week-end, to scorch off the
hundred and forty miles. But this was not rest. It was
super-machinelike, and it helped to crush out the glimmering bit of
soul that was all that was left him from former life. At the end of the
seventh week, without intending it, too weak to resist, he drifted down
to the village with Joe and drowned life and found life until Monday
morning.

Again, at the week-ends, he ground out the one hundred and forty miles,
obliterating the numbness of too great exertion by the numbness of
still greater exertion. At the end of three months he went down a third
time to the village with Joe. He forgot, and lived again, and, living,
he saw, in clear illumination, the beast he was making of himself—not
by the drink, but by the work. The drink was an effect, not a cause. It
followed inevitably upon the work, as the night follows upon the day.
Not by becoming a toil-beast could he win to the heights, was the
message the whiskey whispered to him, and he nodded approbation. The
whiskey was wise. It told secrets on itself.

He called for paper and pencil, and for drinks all around, and while
they drank his very good health, he clung to the bar and scribbled.

“A telegram, Joe,” he said. “Read it.”

Joe read it with a drunken, quizzical leer. But what he read seemed to
sober him. He looked at the other reproachfully, tears oozing into his
eyes and down his cheeks.

“You ain’t goin’ back on me, Mart?” he queried hopelessly.

Martin nodded, and called one of the loungers to him to take the
message to the telegraph office.

“Hold on,” Joe muttered thickly. “Lemme think.”

He held on to the bar, his legs wobbling under him, Martin’s arm around
him and supporting him, while he thought.

“Make that two laundrymen,” he said abruptly. “Here, lemme fix it.”

“What are you quitting for?” Martin demanded.

“Same reason as you.”

“But I’m going to sea. You can’t do that.”

“Nope,” was the answer, “but I can hobo all right, all right.”

Martin looked at him searchingly for a moment, then cried:-

“By God, I think you’re right! Better a hobo than a beast of toil. Why,
man, you’ll live. And that’s more than you ever did before.”

“I was in hospital, once,” Joe corrected. “It was beautiful.
Typhoid—did I tell you?”

While Martin changed the telegram to “two laundrymen,” Joe went on:-

“I never wanted to drink when I was in hospital. Funny, ain’t it? But
when I’ve ben workin’ like a slave all week, I just got to bowl up.
Ever noticed that cooks drink like hell?—an’ bakers, too? It’s the
work. They’ve sure got to. Here, lemme pay half of that telegram.”

“I’ll shake you for it,” Martin offered.

“Come on, everybody drink,” Joe called, as they rattled the dice and
rolled them out on the damp bar.

Monday morning Joe was wild with anticipation. He did not mind his
aching head, nor did he take interest in his work. Whole herds of
moments stole away and were lost while their careless shepherd gazed
out of the window at the sunshine and the trees.

“Just look at it!” he cried. “An’ it’s all mine! It’s free. I can lie
down under them trees an’ sleep for a thousan’ years if I want to. Aw,
come on, Mart, let’s chuck it. What’s the good of waitin’ another
moment. That’s the land of nothin’ to do out there, an’ I got a ticket
for it—an’ it ain’t no return ticket, b’gosh!”

A few minutes later, filling the truck with soiled clothes for the
washer, Joe spied the hotel manager’s shirt. He knew its mark, and with
a sudden glorious consciousness of freedom he threw it on the floor and
stamped on it.

“I wish you was in it, you pig-headed Dutchman!” he shouted. “In it,
an’ right there where I’ve got you! Take that! an’ that! an’ that! damn
you! Hold me back, somebody! Hold me back!”

Martin laughed and held him to his work. On Tuesday night the new
laundrymen arrived, and the rest of the week was spent breaking them
into the routine. Joe sat around and explained his system, but he did
no more work.

“Not a tap,” he announced. “Not a tap. They can fire me if they want
to, but if they do, I’ll quit. No more work in mine, thank you kindly.
Me for the freight cars an’ the shade under the trees. Go to it, you
slaves! That’s right. Slave an’ sweat! Slave an’ sweat! An’ when you’re
dead, you’ll rot the same as me, an’ what’s it matter how you live?—eh?
Tell me that—what’s it matter in the long run?”

On Saturday they drew their pay and came to the parting of the ways.

“They ain’t no use in me askin’ you to change your mind an’ hit the
road with me?” Joe asked hopelessly:

Martin shook his head. He was standing by his wheel, ready to start.
They shook hands, and Joe held on to his for a moment, as he said:-

“I’m goin’ to see you again, Mart, before you an’ me die. That’s
straight dope. I feel it in my bones. Good-by, Mart, an’ be good. I
like you like hell, you know.”

He stood, a forlorn figure, in the middle of the road, watching until
Martin turned a bend and was gone from sight.

“He’s a good Indian, that boy,” he muttered. “A good Indian.”

Then he plodded down the road himself, to the water tank, where half a
dozen empties lay on a side-track waiting for the up freight.




CHAPTER XIX.


Ruth and her family were home again, and Martin, returned to Oakland,
saw much of her. Having gained her degree, she was doing no more
studying; and he, having worked all vitality out of his mind and body,
was doing no writing. This gave them time for each other that they had
never had before, and their intimacy ripened fast.

At first, Martin had done nothing but rest. He had slept a great deal,
and spent long hours musing and thinking and doing nothing. He was like
one recovering from some terrible bout of hardship. The first signs of
reawakening came when he discovered more than languid interest in the
daily paper. Then he began to read again—light novels, and poetry; and
after several days more he was head over heels in his long-neglected
Fiske. His splendid body and health made new vitality, and he possessed
all the resiliency and rebound of youth.

Ruth showed her disappointment plainly when he announced that he was
going to sea for another voyage as soon as he was well rested.

“Why do you want to do that?” she asked.

“Money,” was the answer. “I’ll have to lay in a supply for my next
attack on the editors. Money is the sinews of war, in my case—money and
patience.”

“But if all you wanted was money, why didn’t you stay in the laundry?”

“Because the laundry was making a beast of me. Too much work of that
sort drives to drink.”

She stared at him with horror in her eyes.

“Do you mean—?” she quavered.

It would have been easy for him to get out of it; but his natural
impulse was for frankness, and he remembered his old resolve to be
frank, no matter what happened.

“Yes,” he answered. “Just that. Several times.”

She shivered and drew away from him.

“No man that I have ever known did that—ever did that.”

“Then they never worked in the laundry at Shelly Hot Springs,” he
laughed bitterly. “Toil is a good thing. It is necessary for human
health, so all the preachers say, and Heaven knows I’ve never been
afraid of it. But there is such a thing as too much of a good thing,
and the laundry up there is one of them. And that’s why I’m going to
sea one more voyage. It will be my last, I think, for when I come back,
I shall break into the magazines. I am certain of it.”

She was silent, unsympathetic, and he watched her moodily, realizing
how impossible it was for her to understand what he had been through.

“Some day I shall write it up—‘The Degradation of Toil’ or the
‘Psychology of Drink in the Working-class,’ or something like that for
a title.”

Never, since the first meeting, had they seemed so far apart as that
day. His confession, told in frankness, with the spirit of revolt
behind, had repelled her. But she was more shocked by the repulsion
itself than by the cause of it. It pointed out to her how near she had
drawn to him, and once accepted, it paved the way for greater intimacy.
Pity, too, was aroused, and innocent, idealistic thoughts of reform.
She would save this raw young man who had come so far. She would save
him from the curse of his early environment, and she would save him
from himself in spite of himself. And all this affected her as a very
noble state of consciousness; nor did she dream that behind it and
underlying it were the jealousy and desire of love.

They rode on their wheels much in the delightful fall weather, and out
in the hills they read poetry aloud, now one and now the other, noble,
uplifting poetry that turned one’s thoughts to higher things.
Renunciation, sacrifice, patience, industry, and high endeavor were the
principles she thus indirectly preached—such abstractions being
objectified in her mind by her father, and Mr. Butler, and by Andrew
Carnegie, who, from a poor immigrant boy had arisen to be the
book-giver of the world. All of which was appreciated and enjoyed by
Martin. He followed her mental processes more clearly now, and her soul
was no longer the sealed wonder it had been. He was on terms of
intellectual equality with her. But the points of disagreement did not
affect his love. His love was more ardent than ever, for he loved her
for what she was, and even her physical frailty was an added charm in
his eyes. He read of sickly Elizabeth Barrett, who for years had not
placed her feet upon the ground, until that day of flame when she
eloped with Browning and stood upright, upon the earth, under the open
sky; and what Browning had done for her, Martin decided he could do for
Ruth. But first, she must love him. The rest would be easy. He would
give her strength and health. And he caught glimpses of their life, in
the years to come, wherein, against a background of work and comfort
and general well-being, he saw himself and Ruth reading and discussing
poetry, she propped amid a multitude of cushions on the ground while
she read aloud to him. This was the key to the life they would live.
And always he saw that particular picture. Sometimes it was she who
leaned against him while he read, one arm about her, her head upon his
shoulder. Sometimes they pored together over the printed pages of
beauty. Then, too, she loved nature, and with generous imagination he
changed the scene of their reading—sometimes they read in closed-in
valleys with precipitous walls, or in high mountain meadows, and,
again, down by the gray sand-dunes with a wreath of billows at their
feet, or afar on some volcanic tropic isle where waterfalls descended
and became mist, reaching the sea in vapor veils that swayed and
shivered to every vagrant wisp of wind. But always, in the foreground,
lords of beauty and eternally reading and sharing, lay he and Ruth, and
always in the background that was beyond the background of nature, dim
and hazy, were work and success and money earned that made them free of
the world and all its treasures.

“I should recommend my little girl to be careful,” her mother warned
her one day.

“I know what you mean. But it is impossible. He is not—”

Ruth was blushing, but it was the blush of maidenhood called upon for
the first time to discuss the sacred things of life with a mother held
equally sacred.

“Your kind.” Her mother finished the sentence for her.

Ruth nodded.

“I did not want to say it, but he is not. He is rough, brutal,
strong—too strong. He has not—”

She hesitated and could not go on. It was a new experience, talking
over such matters with her mother. And again her mother completed her
thought for her.

“He has not lived a clean life, is what you wanted to say.”

Again Ruth nodded, and again a blush mantled her face.

“It is just that,” she said. “It has not been his fault, but he has
played much with—”

“With pitch?”

“Yes, with pitch. And he frightens me. Sometimes I am positively in
terror of him, when he talks in that free and easy way of the things he
has done—as if they did not matter. They do matter, don’t they?”

They sat with their arms twined around each other, and in the pause her
mother patted her hand and waited for her to go on.

“But I am interested in him dreadfully,” she continued. “In a way he is
my protégé. Then, too, he is my first boy friend—but not exactly
friend; rather protégé and friend combined. Sometimes, too, when he
frightens me, it seems that he is a bulldog I have taken for a
plaything, like some of the ‘frat’ girls, and he is tugging hard, and
showing his teeth, and threatening to break loose.”

Again her mother waited.

“He interests me, I suppose, like the bulldog. And there is much good
in him, too; but there is much in him that I would not like in—in the
other way. You see, I have been thinking. He swears, he smokes, he
drinks, he has fought with his fists (he has told me so, and he likes
it; he says so). He is all that a man should not be—a man I would want
for my—” her voice sank very low—“husband. Then he is too strong. My
prince must be tall, and slender, and dark—a graceful, bewitching
prince. No, there is no danger of my falling in love with Martin Eden.
It would be the worst fate that could befall me.”

“But it is not that that I spoke about,” her mother equivocated. “Have
you thought about him? He is so ineligible in every way, you know, and
suppose he should come to love you?”

“But he does—already,” she cried.

“It was to be expected,” Mrs. Morse said gently. “How could it be
otherwise with any one who knew you?”

“Olney hates me!” she exclaimed passionately. “And I hate Olney. I feel
always like a cat when he is around. I feel that I must be nasty to
him, and even when I don’t happen to feel that way, why, he’s nasty to
me, anyway. But I am happy with Martin Eden. No one ever loved me
before—no man, I mean, in that way. And it is sweet to be loved—that
way. You know what I mean, mother dear. It is sweet to feel that you
are really and truly a woman.” She buried her face in her mother’s lap,
sobbing. “You think I am dreadful, I know, but I am honest, and I tell
you just how I feel.”

Mrs. Morse was strangely sad and happy. Her child-daughter, who was a
bachelor of arts, was gone; but in her place was a woman-daughter. The
experiment had succeeded. The strange void in Ruth’s nature had been
filled, and filled without danger or penalty. This rough sailor-fellow
had been the instrument, and, though Ruth did not love him, he had made
her conscious of her womanhood.

“His hand trembles,” Ruth was confessing, her face, for shame’s sake,
still buried. “It is most amusing and ridiculous, but I feel sorry for
him, too. And when his hands are too trembly, and his eyes too shiny,
why, I lecture him about his life and the wrong way he is going about
it to mend it. But he worships me, I know. His eyes and his hands do
not lie. And it makes me feel grown-up, the thought of it, the very
thought of it; and I feel that I am possessed of something that is by
rights my own—that makes me like the other girls—and—and young women.
And, then, too, I knew that I was not like them before, and I knew that
it worried you. You thought you did not let me know that dear worry of
yours, but I did, and I wanted to—‘to make good,’ as Martin Eden says.”

It was a holy hour for mother and daughter, and their eyes were wet as
they talked on in the twilight, Ruth all white innocence and frankness,
her mother sympathetic, receptive, yet calmly explaining and guiding.

“He is four years younger than you,” she said. “He has no place in the
world. He has neither position nor salary. He is impractical. Loving
you, he should, in the name of common sense, be doing something that
would give him the right to marry, instead of paltering around with
those stories of his and with childish dreams. Martin Eden, I am
afraid, will never grow up. He does not take to responsibility and a
man’s work in the world like your father did, or like all our friends,
Mr. Butler for one. Martin Eden, I am afraid, will never be a
money-earner. And this world is so ordered that money is necessary to
happiness—oh, no, not these swollen fortunes, but enough of money to
permit of common comfort and decency. He—he has never spoken?”

“He has not breathed a word. He has not attempted to; but if he did, I
would not let him, because, you see, I do not love him.”

“I am glad of that. I should not care to see my daughter, my one
daughter, who is so clean and pure, love a man like him. There are
noble men in the world who are clean and true and manly. Wait for them.
You will find one some day, and you will love him and be loved by him,
and you will be happy with him as your father and I have been happy
with each other. And there is one thing you must always carry in mind—”

“Yes, mother.”

Mrs. Morse’s voice was low and sweet as she said, “And that is the
children.”

“I—have thought about them,” Ruth confessed, remembering the wanton
thoughts that had vexed her in the past, her face again red with maiden
shame that she should be telling such things.

“And it is that, the children, that makes Mr. Eden impossible,” Mrs.
Morse went on incisively. “Their heritage must be clean, and he is, I
am afraid, not clean. Your father has told me of sailors’ lives,
and—and you understand.”

Ruth pressed her mother’s hand in assent, feeling that she really did
understand, though her conception was of something vague, remote, and
terrible that was beyond the scope of imagination.

“You know I do nothing without telling you,” she began. “—Only,
sometimes you must ask me, like this time. I wanted to tell you, but I
did not know how. It is false modesty, I know it is that, but you can
make it easy for me. Sometimes, like this time, you must ask me, you
must give me a chance.”

“Why, mother, you are a woman, too!” she cried exultantly, as they
stood up, catching her mother’s hands and standing erect, facing her in
the twilight, conscious of a strangely sweet equality between them. “I
should never have thought of you in that way if we had not had this
talk. I had to learn that I was a woman to know that you were one,
too.”

“We are women together,” her mother said, drawing her to her and
kissing her. “We are women together,” she repeated, as they went out of
the room, their arms around each other’s waists, their hearts swelling
with a new sense of companionship.

“Our little girl has become a woman,” Mrs. Morse said proudly to her
husband an hour later.

“That means,” he said, after a long look at his wife, “that means she
is in love.”

“No, but that she is loved,” was the smiling rejoinder. “The experiment
has succeeded. She is awakened at last.”

“Then we’ll have to get rid of him.” Mr. Morse spoke briskly, in
matter-of-fact, businesslike tones.

But his wife shook her head. “It will not be necessary. Ruth says he is
going to sea in a few days. When he comes back, she will not be here.
We will send her to Aunt Clara’s. And, besides, a year in the East,
with the change in climate, people, ideas, and everything, is just the
thing she needs.”




CHAPTER XX.


The desire to write was stirring in Martin once more. Stories and poems
were springing into spontaneous creation in his brain, and he made
notes of them against the future time when he would give them
expression. But he did not write. This was his little vacation; he had
resolved to devote it to rest and love, and in both matters he
prospered. He was soon spilling over with vitality, and each day he saw
Ruth, at the moment of meeting, she experienced the old shock of his
strength and health.

“Be careful,” her mother warned her once again. “I am afraid you are
seeing too much of Martin Eden.”

But Ruth laughed from security. She was sure of herself, and in a few
days he would be off to sea. Then, by the time he returned, she would
be away on her visit East. There was a magic, however, in the strength
and health of Martin. He, too, had been told of her contemplated
Eastern trip, and he felt the need for haste. Yet he did not know how
to make love to a girl like Ruth. Then, too, he was handicapped by the
possession of a great fund of experience with girls and women who had
been absolutely different from her. They had known about love and life
and flirtation, while she knew nothing about such things. Her
prodigious innocence appalled him, freezing on his lips all ardors of
speech, and convincing him, in spite of himself, of his own
unworthiness. Also he was handicapped in another way. He had himself
never been in love before. He had liked women in that turgid past of
his, and been fascinated by some of them, but he had not known what it
was to love them. He had whistled in a masterful, careless way, and
they had come to him. They had been diversions, incidents, part of the
game men play, but a small part at most. And now, and for the first
time, he was a suppliant, tender and timid and doubting. He did not
know the way of love, nor its speech, while he was frightened at his
loved one’s clear innocence.

In the course of getting acquainted with a varied world, whirling on
through the ever changing phases of it, he had learned a rule of
conduct which was to the effect that when one played a strange game, he
should let the other fellow play first. This had stood him in good
stead a thousand times and trained him as an observer as well. He knew
how to watch the thing that was strange, and to wait for a weakness,
for a place of entrance, to divulge itself. It was like sparring for an
opening in fist-fighting. And when such an opening came, he knew by
long experience to play for it and to play hard.

So he waited with Ruth and watched, desiring to speak his love but not
daring. He was afraid of shocking her, and he was not sure of himself.
Had he but known it, he was following the right course with her. Love
came into the world before articulate speech, and in its own early
youth it had learned ways and means that it had never forgotten. It was
in this old, primitive way that Martin wooed Ruth. He did not know he
was doing it at first, though later he divined it. The touch of his
hand on hers was vastly more potent than any word he could utter, the
impact of his strength on her imagination was more alluring than the
printed poems and spoken passions of a thousand generations of lovers.
Whatever his tongue could express would have appealed, in part, to her
judgment; but the touch of hand, the fleeting contact, made its way
directly to her instinct. Her judgment was as young as she, but her
instincts were as old as the race and older. They had been young when
love was young, and they were wiser than convention and opinion and all
the new-born things. So her judgment did not act. There was no call
upon it, and she did not realize the strength of the appeal Martin made
from moment to moment to her love-nature. That he loved her, on the
other hand, was as clear as day, and she consciously delighted in
beholding his love-manifestations—the glowing eyes with their tender
lights, the trembling hands, and the never failing swarthy flush that
flooded darkly under his sunburn. She even went farther, in a timid way
inciting him, but doing it so delicately that he never suspected, and
doing it half-consciously, so that she scarcely suspected herself. She
thrilled with these proofs of her power that proclaimed her a woman,
and she took an Eve-like delight in tormenting him and playing upon
him.

Tongue-tied by inexperience and by excess of ardor, wooing unwittingly
and awkwardly, Martin continued his approach by contact. The touch of
his hand was pleasant to her, and something deliciously more than
pleasant. Martin did not know it, but he did know that it was not
distasteful to her. Not that they touched hands often, save at meeting
and parting; but that in handling the bicycles, in strapping on the
books of verse they carried into the hills, and in conning the pages of
books side by side, there were opportunities for hand to stray against
hand. And there were opportunities, too, for her hair to brush his
cheek, and for shoulder to touch shoulder, as they leaned together over
the beauty of the books. She smiled to herself at vagrant impulses
which arose from nowhere and suggested that she rumple his hair; while
he desired greatly, when they tired of reading, to rest his head in her
lap and dream with closed eyes about the future that was to be theirs.
On Sunday picnics at Shellmound Park and Schuetzen Park, in the past,
he had rested his head on many laps, and, usually, he had slept soundly
and selfishly while the girls shaded his face from the sun and looked
down and loved him and wondered at his lordly carelessness of their
love. To rest his head in a girl’s lap had been the easiest thing in
the world until now, and now he found Ruth’s lap inaccessible and
impossible. Yet it was right here, in his reticence, that the strength
of his wooing lay. It was because of this reticence that he never
alarmed her. Herself fastidious and timid, she never awakened to the
perilous trend of their intercourse. Subtly and unaware she grew toward
him and closer to him, while he, sensing the growing closeness, longed
to dare but was afraid.

Once he dared, one afternoon, when he found her in the darkened living
room with a blinding headache.

“Nothing can do it any good,” she had answered his inquiries. “And
besides, I don’t take headache powders. Doctor Hall won’t permit me.”

“I can cure it, I think, and without drugs,” was Martin’s answer. “I am
not sure, of course, but I’d like to try. It’s simply massage. I
learned the trick first from the Japanese. They are a race of masseurs,
you know. Then I learned it all over again with variations from the
Hawaiians. They call it _lomi-lomi_. It can accomplish most of the
things drugs accomplish and a few things that drugs can’t.”

Scarcely had his hands touched her head when she sighed deeply.

“That is so good,” she said.

She spoke once again, half an hour later, when she asked, “Aren’t you
tired?”

The question was perfunctory, and she knew what the answer would be.
Then she lost herself in drowsy contemplation of the soothing balm of
his strength: Life poured from the ends of his fingers, driving the
pain before it, or so it seemed to her, until with the easement of
pain, she fell asleep and he stole away.

She called him up by telephone that evening to thank him.

“I slept until dinner,” she said. “You cured me completely, Mr. Eden,
and I don’t know how to thank you.”

He was warm, and bungling of speech, and very happy, as he replied to
her, and there was dancing in his mind, throughout the telephone
conversation, the memory of Browning and of sickly Elizabeth Barrett.
What had been done could be done again, and he, Martin Eden, could do
it and would do it for Ruth Morse. He went back to his room and to the
volume of Spencer’s “Sociology” lying open on the bed. But he could not
read. Love tormented him and overrode his will, so that, despite all
determination, he found himself at the little ink-stained table. The
sonnet he composed that night was the first of a love-cycle of fifty
sonnets which was completed within two months. He had the “Love-sonnets
from the Portuguese” in mind as he wrote, and he wrote under the best
conditions for great work, at a climacteric of living, in the throes of
his own sweet love-madness.

The many hours he was not with Ruth he devoted to the “Love-cycle,” to
reading at home, or to the public reading-rooms, where he got more
closely in touch with the magazines of the day and the nature of their
policy and content. The hours he spent with Ruth were maddening alike
in promise and in inconclusiveness. It was a week after he cured her
headache that a moonlight sail on Lake Merritt was proposed by Norman
and seconded by Arthur and Olney. Martin was the only one capable of
handling a boat, and he was pressed into service. Ruth sat near him in
the stern, while the three young fellows lounged amidships, deep in a
wordy wrangle over “frat” affairs.

The moon had not yet risen, and Ruth, gazing into the starry vault of
the sky and exchanging no speech with Martin, experienced a sudden
feeling of loneliness. She glanced at him. A puff of wind was heeling
the boat over till the deck was awash, and he, one hand on tiller and
the other on main-sheet, was luffing slightly, at the same time peering
ahead to make out the near-lying north shore. He was unaware of her
gaze, and she watched him intently, speculating fancifully about the
strange warp of soul that led him, a young man with signal powers, to
fritter away his time on the writing of stories and poems foredoomed to
mediocrity and failure.

Her eyes wandered along the strong throat, dimly seen in the starlight,
and over the firm-poised head, and the old desire to lay her hands upon
his neck came back to her. The strength she abhorred attracted her. Her
feeling of loneliness became more pronounced, and she felt tired. Her
position on the heeling boat irked her, and she remembered the headache
he had cured and the soothing rest that resided in him. He was sitting
beside her, quite beside her, and the boat seemed to tilt her toward
him. Then arose in her the impulse to lean against him, to rest herself
against his strength—a vague, half-formed impulse, which, even as she
considered it, mastered her and made her lean toward him. Or was it the
heeling of the boat? She did not know. She never knew. She knew only
that she was leaning against him and that the easement and soothing
rest were very good. Perhaps it had been the boat’s fault, but she made
no effort to retrieve it. She leaned lightly against his shoulder, but
she leaned, and she continued to lean when he shifted his position to
make it more comfortable for her.

It was a madness, but she refused to consider the madness. She was no
longer herself but a woman, with a woman’s clinging need; and though
she leaned ever so lightly, the need seemed satisfied. She was no
longer tired. Martin did not speak. Had he, the spell would have been
broken. But his reticence of love prolonged it. He was dazed and dizzy.
He could not understand what was happening. It was too wonderful to be
anything but a delirium. He conquered a mad desire to let go sheet and
tiller and to clasp her in his arms. His intuition told him it was the
wrong thing to do, and he was glad that sheet and tiller kept his hands
occupied and fended off temptation. But he luffed the boat less
delicately, spilling the wind shamelessly from the sail so as to
prolong the tack to the north shore. The shore would compel him to go
about, and the contact would be broken. He sailed with skill, stopping
way on the boat without exciting the notice of the wranglers, and
mentally forgiving his hardest voyages in that they had made this
marvellous night possible, giving him mastery over sea and boat and
wind so that he could sail with her beside him, her dear weight against
him on his shoulder.

When the first light of the rising moon touched the sail, illuminating
the boat with pearly radiance, Ruth moved away from him. And, even as
she moved, she felt him move away. The impulse to avoid detection was
mutual. The episode was tacitly and secretly intimate. She sat apart
from him with burning cheeks, while the full force of it came home to
her. She had been guilty of something she would not have her brothers
see, nor Olney see. Why had she done it? She had never done anything
like it in her life, and yet she had been moonlight-sailing with young
men before. She had never desired to do anything like it. She was
overcome with shame and with the mystery of her own burgeoning
womanhood. She stole a glance at Martin, who was busy putting the boat
about on the other tack, and she could have hated him for having made
her do an immodest and shameful thing. And he, of all men! Perhaps her
mother was right, and she was seeing too much of him. It would never
happen again, she resolved, and she would see less of him in the
future. She entertained a wild idea of explaining to him the first time
they were alone together, of lying to him, of mentioning casually the
attack of faintness that had overpowered her just before the moon came
up. Then she remembered how they had drawn mutually away before the
revealing moon, and she knew he would know it for a lie.

In the days that swiftly followed she was no longer herself but a
strange, puzzling creature, wilful over judgment and scornful of
self-analysis, refusing to peer into the future or to think about
herself and whither she was drifting. She was in a fever of tingling
mystery, alternately frightened and charmed, and in constant
bewilderment. She had one idea firmly fixed, however, which insured her
security. She would not let Martin speak his love. As long as she did
this, all would be well. In a few days he would be off to sea. And even
if he did speak, all would be well. It could not be otherwise, for she
did not love him. Of course, it would be a painful half hour for him,
and an embarrassing half hour for her, because it would be her first
proposal. She thrilled deliciously at the thought. She was really a
woman, with a man ripe to ask for her in marriage. It was a lure to all
that was fundamental in her sex. The fabric of her life, of all that
constituted her, quivered and grew tremulous. The thought fluttered in
her mind like a flame-attracted moth. She went so far as to imagine
Martin proposing, herself putting the words into his mouth; and she
rehearsed her refusal, tempering it with kindness and exhorting him to
true and noble manhood. And especially he must stop smoking cigarettes.
She would make a point of that. But no, she must not let him speak at
all. She could stop him, and she had told her mother that she would.
All flushed and burning, she regretfully dismissed the conjured
situation. Her first proposal would have to be deferred to a more
propitious time and a more eligible suitor.




CHAPTER XXI.


Came a beautiful fall day, warm and languid, palpitant with the hush of
the changing season, a California Indian summer day, with hazy sun and
wandering wisps of breeze that did not stir the slumber of the air.
Filmy purple mists, that were not vapors but fabrics woven of color,
hid in the recesses of the hills. San Francisco lay like a blur of
smoke upon her heights. The intervening bay was a dull sheen of molten
metal, whereon sailing craft lay motionless or drifted with the lazy
tide. Far Tamalpais, barely seen in the silver haze, bulked hugely by
the Golden Gate, the latter a pale gold pathway under the westering
sun. Beyond, the Pacific, dim and vast, was raising on its sky-line
tumbled cloud-masses that swept landward, giving warning of the first
blustering breath of winter.

The erasure of summer was at hand. Yet summer lingered, fading and
fainting among her hills, deepening the purple of her valleys, spinning
a shroud of haze from waning powers and sated raptures, dying with the
calm content of having lived and lived well. And among the hills, on
their favorite knoll, Martin and Ruth sat side by side, their heads
bent over the same pages, he reading aloud from the love-sonnets of the
woman who had loved Browning as it is given to few men to be loved.

But the reading languished. The spell of passing beauty all about them
was too strong. The golden year was dying as it had lived, a beautiful
and unrepentant voluptuary, and reminiscent rapture and content
freighted heavily the air. It entered into them, dreamy and languorous,
weakening the fibres of resolution, suffusing the face of morality, or
of judgment, with haze and purple mist. Martin felt tender and melting,
and from time to time warm glows passed over him. His head was very
near to hers, and when wandering phantoms of breeze stirred her hair so
that it touched his face, the printed pages swam before his eyes.

“I don’t believe you know a word of what you are reading,” she said
once when he had lost his place.

He looked at her with burning eyes, and was on the verge of becoming
awkward, when a retort came to his lips.

“I don’t believe you know either. What was the last sonnet about?”

“I don’t know,” she laughed frankly. “I’ve already forgotten. Don’t let
us read any more. The day is too beautiful.”

“It will be our last in the hills for some time,” he announced gravely.
“There’s a storm gathering out there on the sea-rim.”

The book slipped from his hands to the ground, and they sat idly and
silently, gazing out over the dreamy bay with eyes that dreamed and did
not see. Ruth glanced sidewise at his neck. She did not lean toward
him. She was drawn by some force outside of herself and stronger than
gravitation, strong as destiny. It was only an inch to lean, and it was
accomplished without volition on her part. Her shoulder touched his as
lightly as a butterfly touches a flower, and just as lightly was the
counter-pressure. She felt his shoulder press hers, and a tremor run
through him. Then was the time for her to draw back. But she had become
an automaton. Her actions had passed beyond the control of her will—she
never thought of control or will in the delicious madness that was upon
her. His arm began to steal behind her and around her. She waited its
slow progress in a torment of delight. She waited, she knew not for
what, panting, with dry, burning lips, a leaping pulse, and a fever of
expectancy in all her blood. The girdling arm lifted higher and drew
her toward him, drew her slowly and caressingly. She could wait no
longer. With a tired sigh, and with an impulsive movement all her own,
unpremeditated, spasmodic, she rested her head upon his breast. His
head bent over swiftly, and, as his lips approached, hers flew to meet
them.

This must be love, she thought, in the one rational moment that was
vouchsafed her. If it was not love, it was too shameful. It could be
nothing else than love. She loved the man whose arms were around her
and whose lips were pressed to hers. She pressed more tightly to him,
with a snuggling movement of her body. And a moment later, tearing
herself half out of his embrace, suddenly and exultantly she reached up
and placed both hands upon Martin Eden’s sunburnt neck. So exquisite
was the pang of love and desire fulfilled that she uttered a low moan,
relaxed her hands, and lay half-swooning in his arms.

Not a word had been spoken, and not a word was spoken for a long time.
Twice he bent and kissed her, and each time her lips met his shyly and
her body made its happy, nestling movement. She clung to him, unable to
release herself, and he sat, half supporting her in his arms, as he
gazed with unseeing eyes at the blur of the great city across the bay.
For once there were no visions in his brain. Only colors and lights and
glows pulsed there, warm as the day and warm as his love. He bent over
her. She was speaking.

“When did you love me?” she whispered.

“From the first, the very first, the first moment I laid eye on you. I
was mad for love of you then, and in all the time that has passed since
then I have only grown the madder. I am maddest, now, dear. I am almost
a lunatic, my head is so turned with joy.”

“I am glad I am a woman, Martin—dear,” she said, after a long sigh.

He crushed her in his arms again and again, and then asked:-

“And you? When did you first know?”

“Oh, I knew it all the time, almost, from the first.”

“And I have been as blind as a bat!” he cried, a ring of vexation in
his voice. “I never dreamed it until just how, when I—when I kissed
you.”

“I didn’t mean that.” She drew herself partly away and looked at him.
“I meant I knew you loved almost from the first.”

“And you?” he demanded.

“It came to me suddenly.” She was speaking very slowly, her eyes warm
and fluttery and melting, a soft flush on her cheeks that did not go
away. “I never knew until just now when—you put your arms around me.
And I never expected to marry you, Martin, not until just now. How did
you make me love you?”

“I don’t know,” he laughed, “unless just by loving you, for I loved you
hard enough to melt the heart of a stone, much less the heart of the
living, breathing woman you are.”

“This is so different from what I thought love would be,” she announced
irrelevantly.

“What did you think it would be like?”

“I didn’t think it would be like this.” She was looking into his eyes
at the moment, but her own dropped as she continued, “You see, I didn’t
know what this was like.”

He offered to draw her toward him again, but it was no more than a
tentative muscular movement of the girdling arm, for he feared that he
might be greedy. Then he felt her body yielding, and once again she was
close in his arms and lips were pressed on lips.

“What will my people say?” she queried, with sudden apprehension, in
one of the pauses.

“I don’t know. We can find out very easily any time we are so minded.”

“But if mamma objects? I am sure I am afraid to tell her.”

“Let me tell her,” he volunteered valiantly. “I think your mother does
not like me, but I can win her around. A fellow who can win you can win
anything. And if we don’t—”

“Yes?”

“Why, we’ll have each other. But there’s no danger not winning your
mother to our marriage. She loves you too well.”

“I should not like to break her heart,” Ruth said pensively.

He felt like assuring her that mothers’ hearts were not so easily
broken, but instead he said, “And love is the greatest thing in the
world.”

“Do you know, Martin, you sometimes frighten me. I am frightened now,
when I think of you and of what you have been. You must be very, very
good to me. Remember, after all, that I am only a child. I never loved
before.”

“Nor I. We are both children together. And we are fortunate above most,
for we have found our first love in each other.”

“But that is impossible!” she cried, withdrawing herself from his arms
with a swift, passionate movement. “Impossible for you. You have been a
sailor, and sailors, I have heard, are—are—”

Her voice faltered and died away.

“Are addicted to having a wife in every port?” he suggested. “Is that
what you mean?”

“Yes,” she answered in a low voice.

“But that is not love.” He spoke authoritatively. “I have been in many
ports, but I never knew a passing touch of love until I saw you that
first night. Do you know, when I said good night and went away, I was
almost arrested.”

“Arrested?”

“Yes. The policeman thought I was drunk; and I was, too—with love for
you.”

“But you said we were children, and I said it was impossible, for you,
and we have strayed away from the point.”

“I said that I never loved anybody but you,” he replied. “You are my
first, my very first.”

“And yet you have been a sailor,” she objected.

“But that doesn’t prevent me from loving you the first.”

“And there have been women—other women—oh!”

And to Martin Eden’s supreme surprise, she burst into a storm of tears
that took more kisses than one and many caresses to drive away. And all
the while there was running through his head Kipling’s line: “_And the
Colonel’s lady and Judy O’Grady are sisters under their skins_.” It was
true, he decided; though the novels he had read had led him to believe
otherwise. His idea, for which the novels were responsible, had been
that only formal proposals obtained in the upper classes. It was all
right enough, down whence he had come, for youths and maidens to win
each other by contact; but for the exalted personages up above on the
heights to make love in similar fashion had seemed unthinkable. Yet the
novels were wrong. Here was a proof of it. The same pressures and
caresses, unaccompanied by speech, that were efficacious with the girls
of the working-class, were equally efficacious with the girls above the
working-class. They were all of the same flesh, after all, sisters
under their skins; and he might have known as much himself had he
remembered his Spencer. As he held Ruth in his arms and soothed her, he
took great consolation in the thought that the Colonel’s lady and Judy
O’Grady were pretty much alike under their skins. It brought Ruth
closer to him, made her possible. Her dear flesh was as anybody’s
flesh, as his flesh. There was no bar to their marriage. Class
difference was the only difference, and class was extrinsic. It could
be shaken off. A slave, he had read, had risen to the Roman purple.
That being so, then he could rise to Ruth. Under her purity, and
saintliness, and culture, and ethereal beauty of soul, she was, in
things fundamentally human, just like Lizzie Connolly and all Lizzie
Connollys. All that was possible of them was possible of her. She could
love, and hate, maybe have hysterics; and she could certainly be
jealous, as she was jealous now, uttering her last sobs in his arms.

“Besides, I am older than you,” she remarked suddenly, opening her eyes
and looking up at him, “three years older.”

“Hush, you are only a child, and I am forty years older than you, in
experience,” was his answer.

In truth, they were children together, so far as love was concerned,
and they were as naive and immature in the expression of their love as
a pair of children, and this despite the fact that she was crammed with
a university education and that his head was full of scientific
philosophy and the hard facts of life.

They sat on through the passing glory of the day, talking as lovers are
prone to talk, marvelling at the wonder of love and at destiny that had
flung them so strangely together, and dogmatically believing that they
loved to a degree never attained by lovers before. And they returned
insistently, again and again, to a rehearsal of their first impressions
of each other and to hopeless attempts to analyze just precisely what
they felt for each other and how much there was of it.

The cloud-masses on the western horizon received the descending sun,
and the circle of the sky turned to rose, while the zenith glowed with
the same warm color. The rosy light was all about them, flooding over
them, as she sang, “Good-by, Sweet Day.” She sang softly, leaning in
the cradle of his arm, her hands in his, their hearts in each other’s
hands.




CHAPTER XXII.


Mrs. Morse did not require a mother’s intuition to read the
advertisement in Ruth’s face when she returned home. The flush that
would not leave the cheeks told the simple story, and more eloquently
did the eyes, large and bright, reflecting an unmistakable inward
glory.

“What has happened?” Mrs. Morse asked, having bided her time till Ruth
had gone to bed.

“You know?” Ruth queried, with trembling lips.

For reply, her mother’s arm went around her, and a hand was softly
caressing her hair.

“He did not speak,” she blurted out. “I did not intend that it should
happen, and I would never have let him speak—only he didn’t speak.”

“But if he did not speak, then nothing could have happened, could it?”

“But it did, just the same.”

“In the name of goodness, child, what are you babbling about?” Mrs.
Morse was bewildered. “I don’t think I know what happened, after all.
What did happen?”

Ruth looked at her mother in surprise.

“I thought you knew. Why, we’re engaged, Martin and I.”

Mrs. Morse laughed with incredulous vexation.

“No, he didn’t speak,” Ruth explained. “He just loved me, that was all.
I was as surprised as you are. He didn’t say a word. He just put his
arm around me. And—and I was not myself. And he kissed me, and I kissed
him. I couldn’t help it. I just had to. And then I knew I loved him.”

She paused, waiting with expectancy the benediction of her mother’s
kiss, but Mrs. Morse was coldly silent.

“It is a dreadful accident, I know,” Ruth recommenced with a sinking
voice. “And I don’t know how you will ever forgive me. But I couldn’t
help it. I did not dream that I loved him until that moment. And you
must tell father for me.”

“Would it not be better not to tell your father? Let me see Martin
Eden, and talk with him, and explain. He will understand and release
you.”

“No! no!” Ruth cried, starting up. “I do not want to be released. I
love him, and love is very sweet. I am going to marry him—of course, if
you will let me.”

“We have other plans for you, Ruth, dear, your father and I—oh, no, no;
no man picked out for you, or anything like that. Our plans go no
farther than your marrying some man in your own station in life, a good
and honorable gentleman, whom you will select yourself, when you love
him.”

“But I love Martin already,” was the plaintive protest.

“We would not influence your choice in any way; but you are our
daughter, and we could not bear to see you make a marriage such as
this. He has nothing but roughness and coarseness to offer you in
exchange for all that is refined and delicate in you. He is no match
for you in any way. He could not support you. We have no foolish ideas
about wealth, but comfort is another matter, and our daughter should at
least marry a man who can give her that—and not a penniless adventurer,
a sailor, a cowboy, a smuggler, and Heaven knows what else, who, in
addition to everything, is hare-brained and irresponsible.”

Ruth was silent. Every word she recognized as true.

“He wastes his time over his writing, trying to accomplish what
geniuses and rare men with college educations sometimes accomplish. A
man thinking of marriage should be preparing for marriage. But not he.
As I have said, and I know you agree with me, he is irresponsible. And
why should he not be? It is the way of sailors. He has never learned to
be economical or temperate. The spendthrift years have marked him. It
is not his fault, of course, but that does not alter his nature. And
have you thought of the years of licentiousness he inevitably has
lived? Have you thought of that, daughter? You know what marriage
means.”

Ruth shuddered and clung close to her mother.

“I have thought.” Ruth waited a long time for the thought to frame
itself. “And it is terrible. It sickens me to think of it. I told you
it was a dreadful accident, my loving him; but I can’t help myself.
Could you help loving father? Then it is the same with me. There is
something in me, in him—I never knew it was there until to-day—but it
is there, and it makes me love him. I never thought to love him, but,
you see, I do,” she concluded, a certain faint triumph in her voice.

They talked long, and to little purpose, in conclusion agreeing to wait
an indeterminate time without doing anything.

The same conclusion was reached, a little later that night, between
Mrs. Morse and her husband, after she had made due confession of the
miscarriage of her plans.

“It could hardly have come otherwise,” was Mr. Morse’s judgment. “This
sailor-fellow has been the only man she was in touch with. Sooner or
later she was going to awaken anyway; and she did awaken, and lo! here
was this sailor-fellow, the only accessible man at the moment, and of
course she promptly loved him, or thought she did, which amounts to the
same thing.”

Mrs. Morse took it upon herself to work slowly and indirectly upon
Ruth, rather than to combat her. There would be plenty of time for
this, for Martin was not in position to marry.

“Let her see all she wants of him,” was Mr. Morse’s advice. “The more
she knows him, the less she’ll love him, I wager. And give her plenty
of contrast. Make a point of having young people at the house. Young
women and young men, all sorts of young men, clever men, men who have
done something or who are doing things, men of her own class,
gentlemen. She can gauge him by them. They will show him up for what he
is. And after all, he is a mere boy of twenty-one. Ruth is no more than
a child. It is calf love with the pair of them, and they will grow out
of it.”

So the matter rested. Within the family it was accepted that Ruth and
Martin were engaged, but no announcement was made. The family did not
think it would ever be necessary. Also, it was tacitly understood that
it was to be a long engagement. They did not ask Martin to go to work,
nor to cease writing. They did not intend to encourage him to mend
himself. And he aided and abetted them in their unfriendly designs, for
going to work was farthest from his thoughts.

“I wonder if you’ll like what I have done!” he said to Ruth several
days later. “I’ve decided that boarding with my sister is too
expensive, and I am going to board myself. I’ve rented a little room
out in North Oakland, retired neighborhood and all the rest, you know,
and I’ve bought an oil-burner on which to cook.”

Ruth was overjoyed. The oil-burner especially pleased her.

“That was the way Mr. Butler began his start,” she said.

Martin frowned inwardly at the citation of that worthy gentleman, and
went on: “I put stamps on all my manuscripts and started them off to
the editors again. Then to-day I moved in, and to-morrow I start to
work.”

“A position!” she cried, betraying the gladness of her surprise in all
her body, nestling closer to him, pressing his hand, smiling. “And you
never told me! What is it?”

He shook his head.

“I meant that I was going to work at my writing.” Her face fell, and he
went on hastily. “Don’t misjudge me. I am not going in this time with
any iridescent ideas. It is to be a cold, prosaic, matter-of-fact
business proposition. It is better than going to sea again, and I shall
earn more money than any position in Oakland can bring an unskilled
man.”

“You see, this vacation I have taken has given me perspective. I
haven’t been working the life out of my body, and I haven’t been
writing, at least not for publication. All I’ve done has been to love
you and to think. I’ve read some, too, but it has been part of my
thinking, and I have read principally magazines. I have generalized
about myself, and the world, my place in it, and my chance to win to a
place that will be fit for you. Also, I’ve been reading Spencer’s
‘Philosophy of Style,’ and found out a lot of what was the matter with
me—or my writing, rather; and for that matter with most of the writing
that is published every month in the magazines.”

“But the upshot of it all—of my thinking and reading and loving—is that
I am going to move to Grub Street. I shall leave masterpieces alone and
do hack-work—jokes, paragraphs, feature articles, humorous verse, and
society verse—all the rot for which there seems so much demand. Then
there are the newspaper syndicates, and the newspaper short-story
syndicates, and the syndicates for the Sunday supplements. I can go
ahead and hammer out the stuff they want, and earn the equivalent of a
good salary by it. There are free-lances, you know, who earn as much as
four or five hundred a month. I don’t care to become as they; but I’ll
earn a good living, and have plenty of time to myself, which I wouldn’t
have in any position.”

“Then, I’ll have my spare time for study and for real work. In between
the grind I’ll try my hand at masterpieces, and I’ll study and prepare
myself for the writing of masterpieces. Why, I am amazed at the
distance I have come already. When I first tried to write, I had
nothing to write about except a few paltry experiences which I neither
understood nor appreciated. But I had no thoughts. I really didn’t. I
didn’t even have the words with which to think. My experiences were so
many meaningless pictures. But as I began to add to my knowledge, and
to my vocabulary, I saw something more in my experiences than mere
pictures. I retained the pictures and I found their interpretation.
That was when I began to do good work, when I wrote ‘Adventure,’ ‘Joy,’
‘The Pot,’ ‘The Wine of Life,’ ‘The Jostling Street,’ the ‘Love-cycle,’
and the ‘Sea Lyrics.’ I shall write more like them, and better; but I
shall do it in my spare time. My feet are on the solid earth, now.
Hack-work and income first, masterpieces afterward. Just to show you, I
wrote half a dozen jokes last night for the comic weeklies; and just as
I was going to bed, the thought struck me to try my hand at a triolet—a
humorous one; and inside an hour I had written four. They ought to be
worth a dollar apiece. Four dollars right there for a few afterthoughts
on the way to bed.”

“Of course it’s all valueless, just so much dull and sordid plodding;
but it is no more dull and sordid than keeping books at sixty dollars a
month, adding up endless columns of meaningless figures until one dies.
And furthermore, the hack-work keeps me in touch with things literary
and gives me time to try bigger things.”

“But what good are these bigger things, these masterpieces?” Ruth
demanded. “You can’t sell them.”

“Oh, yes, I can,” he began; but she interrupted.

“All those you named, and which you say yourself are good—you have not
sold any of them. We can’t get married on masterpieces that won’t
sell.”

“Then we’ll get married on triolets that will sell,” he asserted
stoutly, putting his arm around her and drawing a very unresponsive
sweetheart toward him.

“Listen to this,” he went on in attempted gayety. “It’s not art, but
it’s a dollar.

“He came in
    When I was out,
To borrow some tin
Was why he came in,
    And he went without;
So I was in
    And he was out.”


The merry lilt with which he had invested the jingle was at variance
with the dejection that came into his face as he finished. He had drawn
no smile from Ruth. She was looking at him in an earnest and troubled
way.

“It may be a dollar,” she said, “but it is a jester’s dollar, the fee
of a clown. Don’t you see, Martin, the whole thing is lowering. I want
the man I love and honor to be something finer and higher than a
perpetrator of jokes and doggerel.”

“You want him to be like—say Mr. Butler?” he suggested.

“I know you don’t like Mr. Butler,” she began.

“Mr. Butler’s all right,” he interrupted. “It’s only his indigestion I
find fault with. But to save me I can’t see any difference between
writing jokes or comic verse and running a type-writer, taking
dictation, or keeping sets of books. It is all a means to an end. Your
theory is for me to begin with keeping books in order to become a
successful lawyer or man of business. Mine is to begin with hack-work
and develop into an able author.”

“There is a difference,” she insisted.

“What is it?”

“Why, your good work, what you yourself call good, you can’t sell. You
have tried, you know that,—but the editors won’t buy it.”

“Give me time, dear,” he pleaded. “The hack-work is only makeshift, and
I don’t take it seriously. Give me two years. I shall succeed in that
time, and the editors will be glad to buy my good work. I know what I
am saying; I have faith in myself. I know what I have in me; I know
what literature is, now; I know the average rot that is poured out by a
lot of little men; and I know that at the end of two years I shall be
on the highroad to success. As for business, I shall never succeed at
it. I am not in sympathy with it. It strikes me as dull, and stupid,
and mercenary, and tricky. Anyway I am not adapted for it. I’d never
get beyond a clerkship, and how could you and I be happy on the paltry
earnings of a clerk? I want the best of everything in the world for
you, and the only time when I won’t want it will be when there is
something better. And I’m going to get it, going to get all of it. The
income of a successful author makes Mr. Butler look cheap. A
‘best-seller’ will earn anywhere between fifty and a hundred thousand
dollars—sometimes more and sometimes less; but, as a rule, pretty close
to those figures.”

She remained silent; her disappointment was apparent.

“Well?” he asked.

“I had hoped and planned otherwise. I had thought, and I still think,
that the best thing for you would be to study shorthand—you already
know type-writing—and go into father’s office. You have a good mind,
and I am confident you would succeed as a lawyer.”




CHAPTER XXIII.


That Ruth had little faith in his power as a writer, did not alter her
nor diminish her in Martin’s eyes. In the breathing spell of the
vacation he had taken, he had spent many hours in self-analysis, and
thereby learned much of himself. He had discovered that he loved beauty
more than fame, and that what desire he had for fame was largely for
Ruth’s sake. It was for this reason that his desire for fame was
strong. He wanted to be great in the world’s eyes; “to make good,” as
he expressed it, in order that the woman he loved should be proud of
him and deem him worthy.

As for himself, he loved beauty passionately, and the joy of serving
her was to him sufficient wage. And more than beauty he loved Ruth. He
considered love the finest thing in the world. It was love that had
worked the revolution in him, changing him from an uncouth sailor to a
student and an artist; therefore, to him, the finest and greatest of
the three, greater than learning and artistry, was love. Already he had
discovered that his brain went beyond Ruth’s, just as it went beyond
the brains of her brothers, or the brain of her father. In spite of
every advantage of university training, and in the face of her
bachelorship of arts, his power of intellect overshadowed hers, and his
year or so of self-study and equipment gave him a mastery of the
affairs of the world and art and life that she could never hope to
possess.

All this he realized, but it did not affect his love for her, nor her
love for him. Love was too fine and noble, and he was too loyal a lover
for him to besmirch love with criticism. What did love have to do with
Ruth’s divergent views on art, right conduct, the French Revolution, or
equal suffrage? They were mental processes, but love was beyond reason;
it was superrational. He could not belittle love. He worshipped it.
Love lay on the mountain-tops beyond the valley-land of reason. It was
a sublimated condition of existence, the topmost peak of living, and it
came rarely. Thanks to the school of scientific philosophers he
favored, he knew the biological significance of love; but by a refined
process of the same scientific reasoning he reached the conclusion that
the human organism achieved its highest purpose in love, that love must
not be questioned, but must be accepted as the highest guerdon of life.
Thus, he considered the lover blessed over all creatures, and it was a
delight to him to think of “God’s own mad lover,” rising above the
things of earth, above wealth and judgment, public opinion and
applause, rising above life itself and “dying on a kiss.”

Much of this Martin had already reasoned out, and some of it he
reasoned out later. In the meantime he worked, taking no recreation
except when he went to see Ruth, and living like a Spartan. He paid two
dollars and a half a month rent for the small room he got from his
Portuguese landlady, Maria Silva, a virago and a widow, hard working
and harsher tempered, rearing her large brood of children somehow, and
drowning her sorrow and fatigue at irregular intervals in a gallon of
the thin, sour wine that she bought from the corner grocery and saloon
for fifteen cents. From detesting her and her foul tongue at first,
Martin grew to admire her as he observed the brave fight she made.
There were but four rooms in the little house—three, when Martin’s was
subtracted. One of these, the parlor, gay with an ingrain carpet and
dolorous with a funeral card and a death-picture of one of her numerous
departed babes, was kept strictly for company. The blinds were always
down, and her barefooted tribe was never permitted to enter the sacred
precinct save on state occasions. She cooked, and all ate, in the
kitchen, where she likewise washed, starched, and ironed clothes on all
days of the week except Sunday; for her income came largely from taking
in washing from her more prosperous neighbors. Remained the bedroom,
small as the one occupied by Martin, into which she and her seven
little ones crowded and slept. It was an everlasting miracle to Martin
how it was accomplished, and from her side of the thin partition he
heard nightly every detail of the going to bed, the squalls and
squabbles, the soft chattering, and the sleepy, twittering noises as of
birds. Another source of income to Maria were her cows, two of them,
which she milked night and morning and which gained a surreptitious
livelihood from vacant lots and the grass that grew on either side the
public side walks, attended always by one or more of her ragged boys,
whose watchful guardianship consisted chiefly in keeping their eyes out
for the poundmen.

In his own small room Martin lived, slept, studied, wrote, and kept
house. Before the one window, looking out on the tiny front porch, was
the kitchen table that served as desk, library, and type-writing stand.
The bed, against the rear wall, occupied two-thirds of the total space
of the room. The table was flanked on one side by a gaudy bureau,
manufactured for profit and not for service, the thin veneer of which
was shed day by day. This bureau stood in the corner, and in the
opposite corner, on the table’s other flank, was the kitchen—the
oil-stove on a dry-goods box, inside of which were dishes and cooking
utensils, a shelf on the wall for provisions, and a bucket of water on
the floor. Martin had to carry his water from the kitchen sink, there
being no tap in his room. On days when there was much steam to his
cooking, the harvest of veneer from the bureau was unusually generous.
Over the bed, hoisted by a tackle to the ceiling, was his bicycle. At
first he had tried to keep it in the basement; but the tribe of Silva,
loosening the bearings and puncturing the tires, had driven him out.
Next he attempted the tiny front porch, until a howling southeaster
drenched the wheel a night-long. Then he had retreated with it to his
room and slung it aloft.

A small closet contained his clothes and the books he had accumulated
and for which there was no room on the table or under the table. Hand
in hand with reading, he had developed the habit of making notes, and
so copiously did he make them that there would have been no existence
for him in the confined quarters had he not rigged several
clothes-lines across the room on which the notes were hung. Even so, he
was crowded until navigating the room was a difficult task. He could
not open the door without first closing the closet door, and _vice
versa_. It was impossible for him anywhere to traverse the room in a
straight line. To go from the door to the head of the bed was a zigzag
course that he was never quite able to accomplish in the dark without
collisions. Having settled the difficulty of the conflicting doors, he
had to steer sharply to the right to avoid the kitchen. Next, he
sheered to the left, to escape the foot of the bed; but this sheer, if
too generous, brought him against the corner of the table. With a
sudden twitch and lurch, he terminated the sheer and bore off to the
right along a sort of canal, one bank of which was the bed, the other
the table. When the one chair in the room was at its usual place before
the table, the canal was unnavigable. When the chair was not in use, it
reposed on top of the bed, though sometimes he sat on the chair when
cooking, reading a book while the water boiled, and even becoming
skilful enough to manage a paragraph or two while steak was frying.
Also, so small was the little corner that constituted the kitchen, he
was able, sitting down, to reach anything he needed. In fact, it was
expedient to cook sitting down; standing up, he was too often in his
own way.

In conjunction with a perfect stomach that could digest anything, he
possessed knowledge of the various foods that were at the same time
nutritious and cheap. Pea-soup was a common article in his diet, as
well as potatoes and beans, the latter large and brown and cooked in
Mexican style. Rice, cooked as American housewives never cook it and
can never learn to cook it, appeared on Martin’s table at least once a
day. Dried fruits were less expensive than fresh, and he had usually a
pot of them, cooked and ready at hand, for they took the place of
butter on his bread. Occasionally he graced his table with a piece of
round-steak, or with a soup-bone. Coffee, without cream or milk, he had
twice a day, in the evening substituting tea; but both coffee and tea
were excellently cooked.

There was need for him to be economical. His vacation had consumed
nearly all he had earned in the laundry, and he was so far from his
market that weeks must elapse before he could hope for the first
returns from his hack-work. Except at such times as he saw Ruth, or
dropped in to see his sister Gertude, he lived a recluse, in each day
accomplishing at least three days’ labor of ordinary men. He slept a
scant five hours, and only one with a constitution of iron could have
held himself down, as Martin did, day after day, to nineteen
consecutive hours of toil. He never lost a moment. On the looking-glass
were lists of definitions and pronunciations; when shaving, or
dressing, or combing his hair, he conned these lists over. Similar
lists were on the wall over the oil-stove, and they were similarly
conned while he was engaged in cooking or in washing the dishes. New
lists continually displaced the old ones. Every strange or partly
familiar word encountered in his reading was immediately jotted down,
and later, when a sufficient number had been accumulated, were typed
and pinned to the wall or looking-glass. He even carried them in his
pockets, and reviewed them at odd moments on the street, or while
waiting in butcher shop or grocery to be served.

He went farther in the matter. Reading the works of men who had
arrived, he noted every result achieved by them, and worked out the
tricks by which they had been achieved—the tricks of narrative, of
exposition, of style, the points of view, the contrasts, the epigrams;
and of all these he made lists for study. He did not ape. He sought
principles. He drew up lists of effective and fetching mannerisms, till
out of many such, culled from many writers, he was able to induce the
general principle of mannerism, and, thus equipped, to cast about for
new and original ones of his own, and to weigh and measure and appraise
them properly. In similar manner he collected lists of strong phrases,
the phrases of living language, phrases that bit like acid and scorched
like flame, or that glowed and were mellow and luscious in the midst of
the arid desert of common speech. He sought always for the principle
that lay behind and beneath. He wanted to know how the thing was done;
after that he could do it for himself. He was not content with the fair
face of beauty. He dissected beauty in his crowded little bedroom
laboratory, where cooking smells alternated with the outer bedlam of
the Silva tribe; and, having dissected and learned the anatomy of
beauty, he was nearer being able to create beauty itself.

He was so made that he could work only with understanding. He could not
work blindly, in the dark, ignorant of what he was producing and
trusting to chance and the star of his genius that the effect produced
should be right and fine. He had no patience with chance effects. He
wanted to know why and how. His was deliberate creative genius, and,
before he began a story or poem, the thing itself was already alive in
his brain, with the end in sight and the means of realizing that end in
his conscious possession. Otherwise the effort was doomed to failure.
On the other hand, he appreciated the chance effects in words and
phrases that came lightly and easily into his brain, and that later
stood all tests of beauty and power and developed tremendous and
incommunicable connotations. Before such he bowed down and marvelled,
knowing that they were beyond the deliberate creation of any man. And
no matter how much he dissected beauty in search of the principles that
underlie beauty and make beauty possible, he was aware, always, of the
innermost mystery of beauty to which he did not penetrate and to which
no man had ever penetrated. He knew full well, from his Spencer, that
man can never attain ultimate knowledge of anything, and that the
mystery of beauty was no less than that of life—nay, more—that the
fibres of beauty and life were intertwisted, and that he himself was
but a bit of the same nonunderstandable fabric, twisted of sunshine and
star-dust and wonder.

In fact, it was when filled with these thoughts that he wrote his essay
entitled “Star-dust,” in which he had his fling, not at the principles
of criticism, but at the principal critics. It was brilliant, deep,
philosophical, and deliciously touched with laughter. Also it was
promptly rejected by the magazines as often as it was submitted. But
having cleared his mind of it, he went serenely on his way. It was a
habit he developed, of incubating and maturing his thought upon a
subject, and of then rushing into the type-writer with it. That it did
not see print was a matter of small moment with him. The writing of it
was the culminating act of a long mental process, the drawing together
of scattered threads of thought and the final generalizing upon all the
data with which his mind was burdened. To write such an article was the
conscious effort by which he freed his mind and made it ready for fresh
material and problems. It was in a way akin to that common habit of men
and women troubled by real or fancied grievances, who periodically and
volubly break their long-suffering silence and “have their say” till
the last word is said.




CHAPTER XXIV.


The weeks passed. Martin ran out of money, and publishers’ checks were
far away as ever. All his important manuscripts had come back and been
started out again, and his hack-work fared no better. His little
kitchen was no longer graced with a variety of foods. Caught in the
pinch with a part sack of rice and a few pounds of dried apricots, rice
and apricots was his menu three times a day for five days hand-running.
Then he startled to realize on his credit. The Portuguese grocer, to
whom he had hitherto paid cash, called a halt when Martin’s bill
reached the magnificent total of three dollars and eighty-five cents.

“For you see,” said the grocer, “you no catcha da work, I losa da
mon’.”

And Martin could reply nothing. There was no way of explaining. It was
not true business principle to allow credit to a strong-bodied young
fellow of the working-class who was too lazy to work.

“You catcha da job, I let you have mora da grub,” the grocer assured
Martin. “No job, no grub. Thata da business.” And then, to show that it
was purely business foresight and not prejudice, “Hava da drink on da
house—good friends justa da same.”

So Martin drank, in his easy way, to show that he was good friends with
the house, and then went supperless to bed.

The fruit store, where Martin had bought his vegetables, was run by an
American whose business principles were so weak that he let Martin run
a bill of five dollars before stopping his credit. The baker stopped at
two dollars, and the butcher at four dollars. Martin added his debts
and found that he was possessed of a total credit in all the world of
fourteen dollars and eighty-five cents. He was up with his type-writer
rent, but he estimated that he could get two months’ credit on that,
which would be eight dollars. When that occurred, he would have
exhausted all possible credit.

The last purchase from the fruit store had been a sack of potatoes, and
for a week he had potatoes, and nothing but potatoes, three times a
day. An occasional dinner at Ruth’s helped to keep strength in his
body, though he found it tantalizing enough to refuse further helping
when his appetite was raging at sight of so much food spread before it.
Now and again, though afflicted with secret shame, he dropped in at his
sister’s at meal-time and ate as much as he dared—more than he dared at
the Morse table.

Day by day he worked on, and day by day the postman delivered to him
rejected manuscripts. He had no money for stamps, so the manuscripts
accumulated in a heap under the table. Came a day when for forty hours
he had not tasted food. He could not hope for a meal at Ruth’s, for she
was away to San Rafael on a two weeks’ visit; and for very shame’s sake
he could not go to his sister’s. To cap misfortune, the postman, in his
afternoon round, brought him five returned manuscripts. Then it was
that Martin wore his overcoat down into Oakland, and came back without
it, but with five dollars tinkling in his pocket. He paid a dollar each
on account to the four tradesmen, and in his kitchen fried steak and
onions, made coffee, and stewed a large pot of prunes. And having
dined, he sat down at his table-desk and completed before midnight an
essay which he entitled “The Dignity of Usury.” Having typed it out, he
flung it under the table, for there had been nothing left from the five
dollars with which to buy stamps.

Later on he pawned his watch, and still later his wheel, reducing the
amount available for food by putting stamps on all his manuscripts and
sending them out. He was disappointed with his hack-work. Nobody cared
to buy. He compared it with what he found in the newspapers, weeklies,
and cheap magazines, and decided that his was better, far better, than
the average; yet it would not sell. Then he discovered that most of the
newspapers printed a great deal of what was called “plate” stuff, and
he got the address of the association that furnished it. His own work
that he sent in was returned, along with a stereotyped slip informing
him that the staff supplied all the copy that was needed.

In one of the great juvenile periodicals he noted whole columns of
incident and anecdote. Here was a chance. His paragraphs were returned,
and though he tried repeatedly he never succeeded in placing one. Later
on, when it no longer mattered, he learned that the associate editors
and sub-editors augmented their salaries by supplying those paragraphs
themselves. The comic weeklies returned his jokes and humorous verse,
and the light society verse he wrote for the large magazines found no
abiding-place. Then there was the newspaper storiette. He knew that he
could write better ones than were published. Managing to obtain the
addresses of two newspaper syndicates, he deluged them with storiettes.
When he had written twenty and failed to place one of them, he ceased.
And yet, from day to day, he read storiettes in the dailies and
weeklies, scores and scores of storiettes, not one of which would
compare with his. In his despondency, he concluded that he had no
judgment whatever, that he was hypnotized by what he wrote, and that he
was a self-deluded pretender.

The inhuman editorial machine ran smoothly as ever. He folded the
stamps in with his manuscript, dropped it into the letter-box, and from
three weeks to a month afterward the postman came up the steps and
handed him the manuscript. Surely there were no live, warm editors at
the other end. It was all wheels and cogs and oil-cups—a clever
mechanism operated by automatons. He reached stages of despair wherein
he doubted if editors existed at all. He had never received a sign of
the existence of one, and from absence of judgment in rejecting all he
wrote it seemed plausible that editors were myths, manufactured and
maintained by office boys, typesetters, and pressmen.

The hours he spent with Ruth were the only happy ones he had, and they
were not all happy. He was afflicted always with a gnawing
restlessness, more tantalizing than in the old days before he possessed
her love; for now that he did possess her love, the possession of her
was far away as ever. He had asked for two years; time was flying, and
he was achieving nothing. Again, he was always conscious of the fact
that she did not approve what he was doing. She did not say so
directly. Yet indirectly she let him understand it as clearly and
definitely as she could have spoken it. It was not resentment with her,
but disapproval; though less sweet-natured women might have resented
where she was no more than disappointed. Her disappointment lay in that
this man she had taken to mould, refused to be moulded. To a certain
extent she had found his clay plastic, then it had developed
stubbornness, declining to be shaped in the image of her father or of
Mr. Butler.

What was great and strong in him, she missed, or, worse yet,
misunderstood. This man, whose clay was so plastic that he could live
in any number of pigeonholes of human existence, she thought wilful and
most obstinate because she could not shape him to live in her
pigeonhole, which was the only one she knew. She could not follow the
flights of his mind, and when his brain got beyond her, she deemed him
erratic. Nobody else’s brain ever got beyond her. She could always
follow her father and mother, her brothers and Olney; wherefore, when
she could not follow Martin, she believed the fault lay with him. It
was the old tragedy of insularity trying to serve as mentor to the
universal.

“You worship at the shrine of the established,” he told her once, in a
discussion they had over Praps and Vanderwater. “I grant that as
authorities to quote they are most excellent—the two foremost literary
critics in the United States. Every school teacher in the land looks up
to Vanderwater as the Dean of American criticism. Yet I read his stuff,
and it seems to me the perfection of the felicitous expression of the
inane. Why, he is no more than a ponderous bromide, thanks to Gelett
Burgess. And Praps is no better. His ‘Hemlock Mosses,’ for instance is
beautifully written. Not a comma is out of place; and the tone—ah!—is
lofty, so lofty. He is the best-paid critic in the United States.
Though, Heaven forbid! he’s not a critic at all. They do criticism
better in England.

“But the point is, they sound the popular note, and they sound it so
beautifully and morally and contentedly. Their reviews remind me of a
British Sunday. They are the popular mouthpieces. They back up your
professors of English, and your professors of English back them up. And
there isn’t an original idea in any of their skulls. They know only the
established,—in fact, they are the established. They are weak minded,
and the established impresses itself upon them as easily as the name of
the brewery is impressed on a beer bottle. And their function is to
catch all the young fellows attending the university, to drive out of
their minds any glimmering originality that may chance to be there, and
to put upon them the stamp of the established.”

“I think I am nearer the truth,” she replied, “when I stand by the
established, than you are, raging around like an iconoclastic South Sea
Islander.”

“It was the missionary who did the image breaking,” he laughed. “And
unfortunately, all the missionaries are off among the heathen, so there
are none left at home to break those old images, Mr. Vanderwater and
Mr. Praps.”

“And the college professors, as well,” she added.

He shook his head emphatically. “No; the science professors should
live. They’re really great. But it would be a good deed to break the
heads of nine-tenths of the English professors—little,
microscopic-minded parrots!”

Which was rather severe on the professors, but which to Ruth was
blasphemy. She could not help but measure the professors, neat,
scholarly, in fitting clothes, speaking in well-modulated voices,
breathing of culture and refinement, with this almost indescribable
young fellow whom somehow she loved, whose clothes never would fit him,
whose heavy muscles told of damning toil, who grew excited when he
talked, substituting abuse for calm statement and passionate utterance
for cool self-possession. They at least earned good salaries and
were—yes, she compelled herself to face it—were gentlemen; while he
could not earn a penny, and he was not as they.

She did not weigh Martin’s words nor judge his argument by them. Her
conclusion that his argument was wrong was reached—unconsciously, it is
true—by a comparison of externals. They, the professors, were right in
their literary judgments because they were successes. Martin’s literary
judgments were wrong because he could not sell his wares. To use his
own phrase, they made good, and he did not make good. And besides, it
did not seem reasonable that he should be right—he who had stood, so
short a time before, in that same living room, blushing and awkward,
acknowledging his introduction, looking fearfully about him at the
bric-a-brac his swinging shoulders threatened to break, asking how long
since Swinburne died, and boastfully announcing that he had read
“Excelsior” and the “Psalm of Life.”

Unwittingly, Ruth herself proved his point that she worshipped the
established. Martin followed the processes of her thoughts, but forbore
to go farther. He did not love her for what she thought of Praps and
Vanderwater and English professors, and he was coming to realize, with
increasing conviction, that he possessed brain-areas and stretches of
knowledge which she could never comprehend nor know existed.

In music she thought him unreasonable, and in the matter of opera not
only unreasonable but wilfully perverse.

“How did you like it?” she asked him one night, on the way home from
the opera.

It was a night when he had taken her at the expense of a month’s rigid
economizing on food. After vainly waiting for him to speak about it,
herself still tremulous and stirred by what she had just seen and
heard, she had asked the question.

“I liked the overture,” was his answer. “It was splendid.”

“Yes, but the opera itself?”

“That was splendid too; that is, the orchestra was, though I’d have
enjoyed it more if those jumping-jacks had kept quiet or gone off the
stage.”

Ruth was aghast.

“You don’t mean Tetralani or Barillo?” she queried.

“All of them—the whole kit and crew.”

“But they are great artists,” she protested.

“They spoiled the music just the same, with their antics and
unrealities.”

“But don’t you like Barillo’s voice?” Ruth asked. “He is next to
Caruso, they say.”

“Of course I liked him, and I liked Tetralani even better. Her voice is
exquisite—or at least I think so.”

“But, but—” Ruth stammered. “I don’t know what you mean, then. You
admire their voices, yet say they spoiled the music.”

“Precisely that. I’d give anything to hear them in concert, and I’d
give even a bit more not to hear them when the orchestra is playing.
I’m afraid I am a hopeless realist. Great singers are not great actors.
To hear Barillo sing a love passage with the voice of an angel, and to
hear Tetralani reply like another angel, and to hear it all accompanied
by a perfect orgy of glowing and colorful music—is ravishing, most
ravishing. I do not admit it. I assert it. But the whole effect is
spoiled when I look at them—at Tetralani, five feet ten in her stocking
feet and weighing a hundred and ninety pounds, and at Barillo, a scant
five feet four, greasy-featured, with the chest of a squat, undersized
blacksmith, and at the pair of them, attitudinizing, clasping their
breasts, flinging their arms in the air like demented creatures in an
asylum; and when I am expected to accept all this as the faithful
illusion of a love-scene between a slender and beautiful princess and a
handsome, romantic, young prince—why, I can’t accept it, that’s all.
It’s rot; it’s absurd; it’s unreal. That’s what’s the matter with it.
It’s not real. Don’t tell me that anybody in this world ever made love
that way. Why, if I’d made love to you in such fashion, you’d have
boxed my ears.”

“But you misunderstand,” Ruth protested. “Every form of art has its
limitations.” (She was busy recalling a lecture she had heard at the
university on the conventions of the arts.) “In painting there are only
two dimensions to the canvas, yet you accept the illusion of three
dimensions which the art of a painter enables him to throw into the
canvas. In writing, again, the author must be omnipotent. You accept as
perfectly legitimate the author’s account of the secret thoughts of the
heroine, and yet all the time you know that the heroine was alone when
thinking these thoughts, and that neither the author nor any one else
was capable of hearing them. And so with the stage, with sculpture,
with opera, with every art form. Certain irreconcilable things must be
accepted.”

“Yes, I understood that,” Martin answered. “All the arts have their
conventions.” (Ruth was surprised at his use of the word. It was as if
he had studied at the university himself, instead of being ill-equipped
from browsing at haphazard through the books in the library.) “But even
the conventions must be real. Trees, painted on flat cardboard and
stuck up on each side of the stage, we accept as a forest. It is a real
enough convention. But, on the other hand, we would not accept a sea
scene as a forest. We can’t do it. It violates our senses. Nor would
you, or, rather, should you, accept the ravings and writhings and
agonized contortions of those two lunatics to-night as a convincing
portrayal of love.”

“But you don’t hold yourself superior to all the judges of music?” she
protested.

“No, no, not for a moment. I merely maintain my right as an individual.
I have just been telling you what I think, in order to explain why the
elephantine gambols of Madame Tetralani spoil the orchestra for me. The
world’s judges of music may all be right. But I am I, and I won’t
subordinate my taste to the unanimous judgment of mankind. If I don’t
like a thing, I don’t like it, that’s all; and there is no reason under
the sun why I should ape a liking for it just because the majority of
my fellow-creatures like it, or make believe they like it. I can’t
follow the fashions in the things I like or dislike.”

“But music, you know, is a matter of training,” Ruth argued; “and opera
is even more a matter of training. May it not be—”

“That I am not trained in opera?” he dashed in.

She nodded.

“The very thing,” he agreed. “And I consider I am fortunate in not
having been caught when I was young. If I had, I could have wept
sentimental tears to-night, and the clownish antics of that precious
pair would have but enhanced the beauty of their voices and the beauty
of the accompanying orchestra. You are right. It’s mostly a matter of
training. And I am too old, now. I must have the real or nothing. An
illusion that won’t convince is a palpable lie, and that’s what grand
opera is to me when little Barillo throws a fit, clutches mighty
Tetralani in his arms (also in a fit), and tells her how passionately
he adores her.”

Again Ruth measured his thoughts by comparison of externals and in
accordance with her belief in the established. Who was he that he
should be right and all the cultured world wrong? His words and
thoughts made no impression upon her. She was too firmly intrenched in
the established to have any sympathy with revolutionary ideas. She had
always been used to music, and she had enjoyed opera ever since she was
a child, and all her world had enjoyed it, too. Then by what right did
Martin Eden emerge, as he had so recently emerged, from his rag-time
and working-class songs, and pass judgment on the world’s music? She
was vexed with him, and as she walked beside him she had a vague
feeling of outrage. At the best, in her most charitable frame of mind,
she considered the statement of his views to be a caprice, an erratic
and uncalled-for prank. But when he took her in his arms at the door
and kissed her good night in tender lover-fashion, she forgot
everything in the outrush of her own love to him. And later, on a
sleepless pillow, she puzzled, as she had often puzzled of late, as to
how it was that she loved so strange a man, and loved him despite the
disapproval of her people.

And next day Martin Eden cast hack-work aside, and at white heat
hammered out an essay to which he gave the title, “The Philosophy of
Illusion.” A stamp started it on its travels, but it was destined to
receive many stamps and to be started on many travels in the months
that followed.




CHAPTER XXV.


Maria Silva was poor, and all the ways of poverty were clear to her.
Poverty, to Ruth, was a word signifying a not-nice condition of
existence. That was her total knowledge on the subject. She knew Martin
was poor, and his condition she associated in her mind with the boyhood
of Abraham Lincoln, of Mr. Butler, and of other men who had become
successes. Also, while aware that poverty was anything but delectable,
she had a comfortable middle-class feeling that poverty was salutary,
that it was a sharp spur that urged on to success all men who were not
degraded and hopeless drudges. So that her knowledge that Martin was so
poor that he had pawned his watch and overcoat did not disturb her. She
even considered it the hopeful side of the situation, believing that
sooner or later it would arouse him and compel him to abandon his
writing.

Ruth never read hunger in Martin’s face, which had grown lean and had
enlarged the slight hollows in the cheeks. In fact, she marked the
change in his face with satisfaction. It seemed to refine him, to
remove from him much of the dross of flesh and the too animal-like
vigor that lured her while she detested it. Sometimes, when with her,
she noted an unusual brightness in his eyes, and she admired it, for it
made him appear more the poet and the scholar—the things he would have
liked to be and which she would have liked him to be. But Maria Silva
read a different tale in the hollow cheeks and the burning eyes, and
she noted the changes in them from day to day, by them following the
ebb and flow of his fortunes. She saw him leave the house with his
overcoat and return without it, though the day was chill and raw, and
promptly she saw his cheeks fill out slightly and the fire of hunger
leave his eyes. In the same way she had seen his wheel and watch go,
and after each event she had seen his vigor bloom again.

Likewise she watched his toils, and knew the measure of the midnight
oil he burned. Work! She knew that he outdid her, though his work was
of a different order. And she was surprised to behold that the less
food he had, the harder he worked. On occasion, in a casual sort of
way, when she thought hunger pinched hardest, she would send him in a
loaf of new baking, awkwardly covering the act with banter to the
effect that it was better than he could bake. And again, she would send
one of her toddlers in to him with a great pitcher of hot soup,
debating inwardly the while whether she was justified in taking it from
the mouths of her own flesh and blood. Nor was Martin ungrateful,
knowing as he did the lives of the poor, and that if ever in the world
there was charity, this was it.

On a day when she had filled her brood with what was left in the house,
Maria invested her last fifteen cents in a gallon of cheap wine.
Martin, coming into her kitchen to fetch water, was invited to sit down
and drink. He drank her very-good health, and in return she drank his.
Then she drank to prosperity in his undertakings, and he drank to the
hope that James Grant would show up and pay her for his washing. James
Grant was a journeymen carpenter who did not always pay his bills and
who owed Maria three dollars.

Both Maria and Martin drank the sour new wine on empty stomachs, and it
went swiftly to their heads. Utterly differentiated creatures that they
were, they were lonely in their misery, and though the misery was
tacitly ignored, it was the bond that drew them together. Maria was
amazed to learn that he had been in the Azores, where she had lived
until she was eleven. She was doubly amazed that he had been in the
Hawaiian Islands, whither she had migrated from the Azores with her
people. But her amazement passed all bounds when he told her he had
been on Maui, the particular island whereon she had attained womanhood
and married. Kahului, where she had first met her husband,—he, Martin,
had been there twice! Yes, she remembered the sugar steamers, and he
had been on them—well, well, it was a small world. And Wailuku! That
place, too! Did he know the head-luna of the plantation? Yes, and had
had a couple of drinks with him.

And so they reminiscenced and drowned their hunger in the raw, sour
wine. To Martin the future did not seem so dim. Success trembled just
before him. He was on the verge of clasping it. Then he studied the
deep-lined face of the toil-worn woman before him, remembered her soups
and loaves of new baking, and felt spring up in him the warmest
gratitude and philanthropy.

“Maria,” he exclaimed suddenly. “What would you like to have?”

She looked at him, bepuzzled.

“What would you like to have now, right now, if you could get it?”

“Shoe alla da roun’ for da childs—seven pairs da shoe.”

“You shall have them,” he announced, while she nodded her head gravely.
“But I mean a big wish, something big that you want.”

Her eyes sparkled good-naturedly. He was choosing to make fun with her,
Maria, with whom few made fun these days.

“Think hard,” he cautioned, just as she was opening her mouth to speak.

“Alla right,” she answered. “I thinka da hard. I lika da house, dis
house—all mine, no paya da rent, seven dollar da month.”

“You shall have it,” he granted, “and in a short time. Now wish the
great wish. Make believe I am God, and I say to you anything you want
you can have. Then you wish that thing, and I listen.”

Maria considered solemnly for a space.

“You no ’fraid?” she asked warningly.

“No, no,” he laughed, “I’m not afraid. Go ahead.”

“Most verra big,” she warned again.

“All right. Fire away.”

“Well, den—” She drew a big breath like a child, as she voiced to the
uttermost all she cared to demand of life. “I lika da have one milka
ranch—good milka ranch. Plenty cow, plenty land, plenty grass. I lika
da have near San Le-an; my sister liva dere. I sella da milk in
Oakland. I maka da plentee mon. Joe an’ Nick no runna da cow. Dey go-a
to school. Bimeby maka da good engineer, worka da railroad. Yes, I lika
da milka ranch.”

She paused and regarded Martin with twinkling eyes.

“You shall have it,” he answered promptly.

She nodded her head and touched her lips courteously to the wine-glass
and to the giver of the gift she knew would never be given. His heart
was right, and in her own heart she appreciated his intention as much
as if the gift had gone with it.

“No, Maria,” he went on; “Nick and Joe won’t have to peddle milk, and
all the kids can go to school and wear shoes the whole year round. It
will be a first-class milk ranch—everything complete. There will be a
house to live in and a stable for the horses, and cow-barns, of course.
There will be chickens, pigs, vegetables, fruit trees, and everything
like that; and there will be enough cows to pay for a hired man or two.
Then you won’t have anything to do but take care of the children. For
that matter, if you find a good man, you can marry and take it easy
while he runs the ranch.”

And from such largess, dispensed from his future, Martin turned and
took his one good suit of clothes to the pawnshop. His plight was
desperate for him to do this, for it cut him off from Ruth. He had no
second-best suit that was presentable, and though he could go to the
butcher and the baker, and even on occasion to his sister’s, it was
beyond all daring to dream of entering the Morse home so disreputably
apparelled.

He toiled on, miserable and well-nigh hopeless. It began to appear to
him that the second battle was lost and that he would have to go to
work. In doing this he would satisfy everybody—the grocer, his sister,
Ruth, and even Maria, to whom he owed a month’s room rent. He was two
months behind with his type-writer, and the agency was clamoring for
payment or for the return of the machine. In desperation, all but ready
to surrender, to make a truce with fate until he could get a fresh
start, he took the civil service examinations for the Railway Mail. To
his surprise, he passed first. The job was assured, though when the
call would come to enter upon his duties nobody knew.

It was at this time, at the lowest ebb, that the smooth-running
editorial machine broke down. A cog must have slipped or an oil-cup run
dry, for the postman brought him one morning a short, thin envelope.
Martin glanced at the upper left-hand corner and read the name and
address of the _Transcontinental Monthly_. His heart gave a great leap,
and he suddenly felt faint, the sinking feeling accompanied by a
strange trembling of the knees. He staggered into his room and sat down
on the bed, the envelope still unopened, and in that moment came
understanding to him how people suddenly fall dead upon receipt of
extraordinarily good news.

Of course this was good news. There was no manuscript in that thin
envelope, therefore it was an acceptance. He knew the story in the
hands of the _Transcontinental_. It was “The Ring of Bells,” one of his
horror stories, and it was an even five thousand words. And, since
first-class magazines always paid on acceptance, there was a check
inside. Two cents a word—twenty dollars a thousand; the check must be a
hundred dollars. One hundred dollars! As he tore the envelope open,
every item of all his debts surged in his brain—$3.85 to the grocer;
butcher $4.00 flat; baker, $2.00; fruit store, $5.00; total, $14.85.
Then there was room rent, $2.50; another month in advance, $2.50; two
months’ type-writer, $8.00; a month in advance, $4.00; total, $31.85.
And finally to be added, his pledges, plus interest, with the
pawnbroker—watch, $5.50; overcoat, $5.50; wheel, $7.75; suit of
clothes, $5.50 (60 % interest, but what did it matter?)—grand total,
$56.10. He saw, as if visible in the air before him, in illuminated
figures, the whole sum, and the subtraction that followed and that gave
a remainder of $43.90. When he had squared every debt, redeemed every
pledge, he would still have jingling in his pockets a princely $43.90.
And on top of that he would have a month’s rent paid in advance on the
type-writer and on the room.

By this time he had drawn the single sheet of type-written letter out
and spread it open. There was no check. He peered into the envelope,
held it to the light, but could not trust his eyes, and in trembling
haste tore the envelope apart. There was no check. He read the letter,
skimming it line by line, dashing through the editor’s praise of his
story to the meat of the letter, the statement why the check had not
been sent. He found no such statement, but he did find that which made
him suddenly wilt. The letter slid from his hand. His eyes went
lack-lustre, and he lay back on the pillow, pulling the blanket about
him and up to his chin.

Five dollars for “The Ring of Bells”—five dollars for five thousand
words! Instead of two cents a word, ten words for a cent! And the
editor had praised it, too. And he would receive the check when the
story was published. Then it was all poppycock, two cents a word for
minimum rate and payment upon acceptance. It was a lie, and it had led
him astray. He would never have attempted to write had he known that.
He would have gone to work—to work for Ruth. He went back to the day he
first attempted to write, and was appalled at the enormous waste of
time—and all for ten words for a cent. And the other high rewards of
writers, that he had read about, must be lies, too. His second-hand
ideas of authorship were wrong, for here was the proof of it.

The _Transcontinental_ sold for twenty-five cents, and its dignified
and artistic cover proclaimed it as among the first-class magazines. It
was a staid, respectable magazine, and it had been published
continuously since long before he was born. Why, on the outside cover
were printed every month the words of one of the world’s great writers,
words proclaiming the inspired mission of the _Transcontinental_ by a
star of literature whose first coruscations had appeared inside those
self-same covers. And the high and lofty, heaven-inspired
_Transcontinental_ paid five dollars for five thousand words! The great
writer had recently died in a foreign land—in dire poverty, Martin
remembered, which was not to be wondered at, considering the
magnificent pay authors receive.

Well, he had taken the bait, the newspaper lies about writers and their
pay, and he had wasted two years over it. But he would disgorge the
bait now. Not another line would he ever write. He would do what Ruth
wanted him to do, what everybody wanted him to do—get a job. The
thought of going to work reminded him of Joe—Joe, tramping through the
land of nothing-to-do. Martin heaved a great sigh of envy. The reaction
of nineteen hours a day for many days was strong upon him. But then,
Joe was not in love, had none of the responsibilities of love, and he
could afford to loaf through the land of nothing-to-do. He, Martin, had
something to work for, and go to work he would. He would start out
early next morning to hunt a job. And he would let Ruth know, too, that
he had mended his ways and was willing to go into her father’s office.

Five dollars for five thousand words, ten words for a cent, the market
price for art. The disappointment of it, the lie of it, the infamy of
it, were uppermost in his thoughts; and under his closed eyelids, in
fiery figures, burned the “$3.85” he owed the grocer. He shivered, and
was aware of an aching in his bones. The small of his back ached
especially. His head ached, the top of it ached, the back of it ached,
the brains inside of it ached and seemed to be swelling, while the ache
over his brows was intolerable. And beneath the brows, planted under
his lids, was the merciless “$3.85.” He opened his eyes to escape it,
but the white light of the room seemed to sear the balls and forced him
to close his eyes, when the “$3.85” confronted him again.

Five dollars for five thousand words, ten words for a cent—that
particular thought took up its residence in his brain, and he could no
more escape it than he could the “$3.85” under his eyelids. A change
seemed to come over the latter, and he watched curiously, till “$2.00”
burned in its stead. Ah, he thought, that was the baker. The next sum
that appeared was “$2.50.” It puzzled him, and he pondered it as if
life and death hung on the solution. He owed somebody two dollars and a
half, that was certain, but who was it? To find it was the task set him
by an imperious and malignant universe, and he wandered through the
endless corridors of his mind, opening all manner of lumber rooms and
chambers stored with odds and ends of memories and knowledge as he
vainly sought the answer. After several centuries it came to him,
easily, without effort, that it was Maria. With a great relief he
turned his soul to the screen of torment under his lids. He had solved
the problem; now he could rest. But no, the “$2.50” faded away, and in
its place burned “$8.00.” Who was that? He must go the dreary round of
his mind again and find out.

How long he was gone on this quest he did not know, but after what
seemed an enormous lapse of time, he was called back to himself by a
knock at the door, and by Maria’s asking if he was sick. He replied in
a muffled voice he did not recognize, saying that he was merely taking
a nap. He was surprised when he noted the darkness of night in the
room. He had received the letter at two in the afternoon, and he
realized that he was sick.

Then the “$8.00” began to smoulder under his lids again, and he
returned himself to servitude. But he grew cunning. There was no need
for him to wander through his mind. He had been a fool. He pulled a
lever and made his mind revolve about him, a monstrous wheel of
fortune, a merry-go-round of memory, a revolving sphere of wisdom.
Faster and faster it revolved, until its vortex sucked him in and he
was flung whirling through black chaos.

Quite naturally he found himself at a mangle, feeding starched cuffs.
But as he fed he noticed figures printed in the cuffs. It was a new way
of marking linen, he thought, until, looking closer, he saw “$3.85” on
one of the cuffs. Then it came to him that it was the grocer’s bill,
and that these were his bills flying around on the drum of the mangle.
A crafty idea came to him. He would throw the bills on the floor and so
escape paying them. No sooner thought than done, and he crumpled the
cuffs spitefully as he flung them upon an unusually dirty floor. Ever
the heap grew, and though each bill was duplicated a thousand times, he
found only one for two dollars and a half, which was what he owed
Maria. That meant that Maria would not press for payment, and he
resolved generously that it would be the only one he would pay; so he
began searching through the cast-out heap for hers. He sought it
desperately, for ages, and was still searching when the manager of the
hotel entered, the fat Dutchman. His face blazed with wrath, and he
shouted in stentorian tones that echoed down the universe, “I shall
deduct the cost of those cuffs from your wages!” The pile of cuffs grew
into a mountain, and Martin knew that he was doomed to toil for a
thousand years to pay for them. Well, there was nothing left to do but
kill the manager and burn down the laundry. But the big Dutchman
frustrated him, seizing him by the nape of the neck and dancing him up
and down. He danced him over the ironing tables, the stove, and the
mangles, and out into the wash-room and over the wringer and washer.
Martin was danced until his teeth rattled and his head ached, and he
marvelled that the Dutchman was so strong.

And then he found himself before the mangle, this time receiving the
cuffs an editor of a magazine was feeding from the other side. Each
cuff was a check, and Martin went over them anxiously, in a fever of
expectation, but they were all blanks. He stood there and received the
blanks for a million years or so, never letting one go by for fear it
might be filled out. At last he found it. With trembling fingers he
held it to the light. It was for five dollars. “Ha! Ha!” laughed the
editor across the mangle. “Well, then, I shall kill you,” Martin said.
He went out into the wash-room to get the axe, and found Joe starching
manuscripts. He tried to make him desist, then swung the axe for him.
But the weapon remained poised in mid-air, for Martin found himself
back in the ironing room in the midst of a snow-storm. No, it was not
snow that was falling, but checks of large denomination, the smallest
not less than a thousand dollars. He began to collect them and sort
them out, in packages of a hundred, tying each package securely with
twine.

He looked up from his task and saw Joe standing before him juggling
flat-irons, starched shirts, and manuscripts. Now and again he reached
out and added a bundle of checks to the flying miscellany that soared
through the roof and out of sight in a tremendous circle. Martin struck
at him, but he seized the axe and added it to the flying circle. Then
he plucked Martin and added him. Martin went up through the roof,
clutching at manuscripts, so that by the time he came down he had a
large armful. But no sooner down than up again, and a second and a
third time and countless times he flew around the circle. From far off
he could hear a childish treble singing: “Waltz me around again,
Willie, around, around, around.”

He recovered the axe in the midst of the Milky Way of checks, starched
shirts, and manuscripts, and prepared, when he came down, to kill Joe.
But he did not come down. Instead, at two in the morning, Maria, having
heard his groans through the thin partition, came into his room, to put
hot flat-irons against his body and damp cloths upon his aching eyes.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Martin Eden did not go out to hunt for a job in the morning. It was
late afternoon before he came out of his delirium and gazed with aching
eyes about the room. Mary, one of the tribe of Silva, eight years old,
keeping watch, raised a screech at sight of his returning
consciousness. Maria hurried into the room from the kitchen. She put
her work-calloused hand upon his hot forehead and felt his pulse.

“You lika da eat?” she asked.

He shook his head. Eating was farthest from his desire, and he wondered
that he should ever have been hungry in his life.

“I’m sick, Maria,” he said weakly. “What is it? Do you know?”

“Grip,” she answered. “Two or three days you alla da right. Better you
no eat now. Bimeby plenty can eat, to-morrow can eat maybe.”

Martin was not used to sickness, and when Maria and her little girl
left him, he essayed to get up and dress. By a supreme exertion of
will, with rearing brain and eyes that ached so that he could not keep
them open, he managed to get out of bed, only to be left stranded by
his senses upon the table. Half an hour later he managed to regain the
bed, where he was content to lie with closed eyes and analyze his
various pains and weaknesses. Maria came in several times to change the
cold cloths on his forehead. Otherwise she left him in peace, too wise
to vex him with chatter. This moved him to gratitude, and he murmured
to himself, “Maria, you getta da milka ranch, all righta, all right.”

Then he remembered his long-buried past of yesterday.

It seemed a life-time since he had received that letter from the
_Transcontinental_, a life-time since it was all over and done with and
a new page turned. He had shot his bolt, and shot it hard, and now he
was down on his back. If he hadn’t starved himself, he wouldn’t have
been caught by La Grippe. He had been run down, and he had not had the
strength to throw off the germ of disease which had invaded his system.
This was what resulted.

“What does it profit a man to write a whole library and lose his own
life?” he demanded aloud. “This is no place for me. No more literature
in mine. Me for the counting-house and ledger, the monthly salary, and
the little home with Ruth.”

Two days later, having eaten an egg and two slices of toast and drunk a
cup of tea, he asked for his mail, but found his eyes still hurt too
much to permit him to read.

“You read for me, Maria,” he said. “Never mind the big, long letters.
Throw them under the table. Read me the small letters.”

“No can,” was the answer. “Teresa, she go to school, she can.”

So Teresa Silva, aged nine, opened his letters and read them to him. He
listened absently to a long dun from the type-writer people, his mind
busy with ways and means of finding a job. Suddenly he was shocked back
to himself.

“‘We offer you forty dollars for all serial rights in your story,’”
Teresa slowly spelled out, “‘provided you allow us to make the
alterations suggested.’”

“What magazine is that?” Martin shouted. “Here, give it to me!”

He could see to read, now, and he was unaware of the pain of the
action. It was the _White Mouse_ that was offering him forty dollars,
and the story was “The Whirlpool,” another of his early horror stories.
He read the letter through again and again. The editor told him plainly
that he had not handled the idea properly, but that it was the idea
they were buying because it was original. If they could cut the story
down one-third, they would take it and send him forty dollars on
receipt of his answer.

He called for pen and ink, and told the editor he could cut the story
down three-thirds if he wanted to, and to send the forty dollars right
along.

The letter despatched to the letter-box by Teresa, Martin lay back and
thought. It wasn’t a lie, after all. The _White Mouse_ paid on
acceptance. There were three thousand words in “The Whirlpool.” Cut
down a third, there would be two thousand. At forty dollars that would
be two cents a word. Pay on acceptance and two cents a word—the
newspapers had told the truth. And he had thought the _White Mouse_ a
third-rater! It was evident that he did not know the magazines. He had
deemed the _Transcontinental_ a first-rater, and it paid a cent for ten
words. He had classed the _White Mouse_ as of no account, and it paid
twenty times as much as the_ Transcontinental_ and also had paid on
acceptance.

Well, there was one thing certain: when he got well, he would not go
out looking for a job. There were more stories in his head as good as
“The Whirlpool,” and at forty dollars apiece he could earn far more
than in any job or position. Just when he thought the battle lost, it
was won. He had proved for his career. The way was clear. Beginning
with the _White Mouse_ he would add magazine after magazine to his
growing list of patrons. Hack-work could be put aside. For that matter,
it had been wasted time, for it had not brought him a dollar. He would
devote himself to work, good work, and he would pour out the best that
was in him. He wished Ruth was there to share in his joy, and when he
went over the letters left lying on his bed, he found one from her. It
was sweetly reproachful, wondering what had kept him away for so
dreadful a length of time. He reread the letter adoringly, dwelling
over her handwriting, loving each stroke of her pen, and in the end
kissing her signature.

And when he answered, he told her recklessly that he had not been to
see her because his best clothes were in pawn. He told her that he had
been sick, but was once more nearly well, and that inside ten days or
two weeks (as soon as a letter could travel to New York City and
return) he would redeem his clothes and be with her.

But Ruth did not care to wait ten days or two weeks. Besides, her lover
was sick. The next afternoon, accompanied by Arthur, she arrived in the
Morse carriage, to the unqualified delight of the Silva tribe and of
all the urchins on the street, and to the consternation of Maria. She
boxed the ears of the Silvas who crowded about the visitors on the tiny
front porch, and in more than usual atrocious English tried to
apologize for her appearance. Sleeves rolled up from soap-flecked arms
and a wet gunny-sack around her waist told of the task at which she had
been caught. So flustered was she by two such grand young people asking
for her lodger, that she forgot to invite them to sit down in the
little parlor. To enter Martin’s room, they passed through the kitchen,
warm and moist and steamy from the big washing in progress. Maria, in
her excitement, jammed the bedroom and bedroom-closet doors together,
and for five minutes, through the partly open door, clouds of steam,
smelling of soap-suds and dirt, poured into the sick chamber.

Ruth succeeded in veering right and left and right again, and in
running the narrow passage between table and bed to Martin’s side; but
Arthur veered too wide and fetched up with clatter and bang of pots and
pans in the corner where Martin did his cooking. Arthur did not linger
long. Ruth occupied the only chair, and having done his duty, he went
outside and stood by the gate, the centre of seven marvelling Silvas,
who watched him as they would have watched a curiosity in a side-show.
All about the carriage were gathered the children from a dozen blocks,
waiting and eager for some tragic and terrible dénouement. Carriages
were seen on their street only for weddings and funerals. Here was
neither marriage nor death: therefore, it was something transcending
experience and well worth waiting for.

Martin had been wild to see Ruth. His was essentially a love-nature,
and he possessed more than the average man’s need for sympathy. He was
starving for sympathy, which, with him, meant intelligent
understanding; and he had yet to learn that Ruth’s sympathy was largely
sentimental and tactful, and that it proceeded from gentleness of
nature rather than from understanding of the objects of her sympathy.
So it was while Martin held her hand and gladly talked, that her love
for him prompted her to press his hand in return, and that her eyes
were moist and luminous at sight of his helplessness and of the marks
suffering had stamped upon his face.

But while he told her of his two acceptances, of his despair when he
received the one from the _Transcontinental_, and of the corresponding
delight with which he received the one from the _White Mouse_, she did
not follow him. She heard the words he uttered and understood their
literal import, but she was not with him in his despair and his
delight. She could not get out of herself. She was not interested in
selling stories to magazines. What was important to her was matrimony.
She was not aware of it, however, any more than she was aware that her
desire that Martin take a position was the instinctive and preparative
impulse of motherhood. She would have blushed had she been told as much
in plain, set terms, and next, she might have grown indignant and
asserted that her sole interest lay in the man she loved and her desire
for him to make the best of himself. So, while Martin poured out his
heart to her, elated with the first success his chosen work in the
world had received, she paid heed to his bare words only, gazing now
and again about the room, shocked by what she saw.

For the first time Ruth gazed upon the sordid face of poverty. Starving
lovers had always seemed romantic to her,—but she had had no idea how
starving lovers lived. She had never dreamed it could be like this.
Ever her gaze shifted from the room to him and back again. The steamy
smell of dirty clothes, which had entered with her from the kitchen,
was sickening. Martin must be soaked with it, Ruth concluded, if that
awful woman washed frequently. Such was the contagiousness of
degradation. When she looked at Martin, she seemed to see the smirch
left upon him by his surroundings. She had never seen him unshaven, and
the three days’ growth of beard on his face was repulsive to her. Not
alone did it give him the same dark and murky aspect of the Silva
house, inside and out, but it seemed to emphasize that animal-like
strength of his which she detested. And here he was, being confirmed in
his madness by the two acceptances he took such pride in telling her
about. A little longer and he would have surrendered and gone to work.
Now he would continue on in this horrible house, writing and starving
for a few more months.

“What is that smell?” she asked suddenly.

“Some of Maria’s washing smells, I imagine,” was the answer. “I am
growing quite accustomed to them.”

“No, no; not that. It is something else. A stale, sickish smell.”

Martin sampled the air before replying.

“I can’t smell anything else, except stale tobacco smoke,” he
announced.

“That’s it. It is terrible. Why do you smoke so much, Martin?”

“I don’t know, except that I smoke more than usual when I am lonely.
And then, too, it’s such a long-standing habit. I learned when I was
only a youngster.”

“It is not a nice habit, you know,” she reproved. “It smells to
heaven.”

“That’s the fault of the tobacco. I can afford only the cheapest. But
wait until I get that forty-dollar check. I’ll use a brand that is not
offensive even to the angels. But that wasn’t so bad, was it, two
acceptances in three days? That forty-five dollars will pay about all
my debts.”

“For two years’ work?” she queried.

“No, for less than a week’s work. Please pass me that book over on the
far corner of the table, the account book with the gray cover.” He
opened it and began turning over the pages rapidly. “Yes, I was right.
Four days for ‘The Ring of Bells,’ two days for ‘The Whirlpool.’ That’s
forty-five dollars for a week’s work, one hundred and eighty dollars a
month. That beats any salary I can command. And, besides, I’m just
beginning. A thousand dollars a month is not too much to buy for you
all I want you to have. A salary of five hundred a month would be too
small. That forty-five dollars is just a starter. Wait till I get my
stride. Then watch my smoke.”

Ruth misunderstood his slang, and reverted to cigarettes.

“You smoke more than enough as it is, and the brand of tobacco will
make no difference. It is the smoking itself that is not nice, no
matter what the brand may be. You are a chimney, a living volcano, a
perambulating smoke-stack, and you are a perfect disgrace, Martin dear,
you know you are.”

She leaned toward him, entreaty in her eyes, and as he looked at her
delicate face and into her pure, limpid eyes, as of old he was struck
with his own unworthiness.

“I wish you wouldn’t smoke any more,” she whispered. “Please, for—my
sake.”

“All right, I won’t,” he cried. “I’ll do anything you ask, dear love,
anything; you know that.”

A great temptation assailed her. In an insistent way she had caught
glimpses of the large, easy-going side of his nature, and she felt
sure, if she asked him to cease attempting to write, that he would
grant her wish. In the swift instant that elapsed, the words trembled
on her lips. But she did not utter them. She was not quite brave
enough; she did not quite dare. Instead, she leaned toward him to meet
him, and in his arms murmured:-

“You know, it is really not for my sake, Martin, but for your own. I am
sure smoking hurts you; and besides, it is not good to be a slave to
anything, to a drug least of all.”

“I shall always be your slave,” he smiled.

“In which case, I shall begin issuing my commands.”

She looked at him mischievously, though deep down she was already
regretting that she had not preferred her largest request.

“I live but to obey, your majesty.”

“Well, then, my first commandment is, Thou shalt not omit to shave
every day. Look how you have scratched my cheek.”

And so it ended in caresses and love-laughter. But she had made one
point, and she could not expect to make more than one at a time. She
felt a woman’s pride in that she had made him stop smoking. Another
time she would persuade him to take a position, for had he not said he
would do anything she asked?

She left his side to explore the room, examining the clothes-lines of
notes overhead, learning the mystery of the tackle used for suspending
his wheel under the ceiling, and being saddened by the heap of
manuscripts under the table which represented to her just so much
wasted time. The oil-stove won her admiration, but on investigating the
food shelves she found them empty.

“Why, you haven’t anything to eat, you poor dear,” she said with tender
compassion. “You must be starving.”

“I store my food in Maria’s safe and in her pantry,” he lied. “It keeps
better there. No danger of my starving. Look at that.”

She had come back to his side, and she saw him double his arm at the
elbow, the biceps crawling under his shirt-sleeve and swelling into a
knot of muscle, heavy and hard. The sight repelled her. Sentimentally,
she disliked it. But her pulse, her blood, every fibre of her, loved it
and yearned for it, and, in the old, inexplicable way, she leaned
toward him, not away from him. And in the moment that followed, when he
crushed her in his arms, the brain of her, concerned with the
superficial aspects of life, was in revolt; while the heart of her, the
woman of her, concerned with life itself, exulted triumphantly. It was
in moments like this that she felt to the uttermost the greatness of
her love for Martin, for it was almost a swoon of delight to her to
feel his strong arms about her, holding her tightly, hurting her with
the grip of their fervor. At such moments she found justification for
her treason to her standards, for her violation of her own high ideals,
and, most of all, for her tacit disobedience to her mother and father.
They did not want her to marry this man. It shocked them that she
should love him. It shocked her, too, sometimes, when she was apart
from him, a cool and reasoning creature. With him, she loved him—in
truth, at times a vexed and worried love; but love it was, a love that
was stronger than she.

“This La Grippe is nothing,” he was saying. “It hurts a bit, and gives
one a nasty headache, but it doesn’t compare with break-bone fever.”

“Have you had that, too?” she queried absently, intent on the
heaven-sent justification she was finding in his arms.

And so, with absent queries, she led him on, till suddenly his words
startled her.

He had had the fever in a secret colony of thirty lepers on one of the
Hawaiian Islands.

“But why did you go there?” she demanded.

Such royal carelessness of body seemed criminal.

“Because I didn’t know,” he answered. “I never dreamed of lepers. When
I deserted the schooner and landed on the beach, I headed inland for
some place of hiding. For three days I lived off guavas, _ohia_-apples,
and bananas, all of which grew wild in the jungle. On the fourth day I
found the trail—a mere foot-trail. It led inland, and it led up. It was
the way I wanted to go, and it showed signs of recent travel. At one
place it ran along the crest of a ridge that was no more than a
knife-edge. The trail wasn’t three feet wide on the crest, and on
either side the ridge fell away in precipices hundreds of feet deep.
One man, with plenty of ammunition, could have held it against a
hundred thousand.

“It was the only way in to the hiding-place. Three hours after I found
the trail I was there, in a little mountain valley, a pocket in the
midst of lava peaks. The whole place was terraced for taro-patches,
fruit trees grew there, and there were eight or ten grass huts. But as
soon as I saw the inhabitants I knew what I’d struck. One sight of them
was enough.”

“What did you do?” Ruth demanded breathlessly, listening, like any
Desdemona, appalled and fascinated.

“Nothing for me to do. Their leader was a kind old fellow, pretty far
gone, but he ruled like a king. He had discovered the little valley and
founded the settlement—all of which was against the law. But he had
guns, plenty of ammunition, and those Kanakas, trained to the shooting
of wild cattle and wild pig, were dead shots. No, there wasn’t any
running away for Martin Eden. He stayed—for three months.”

“But how did you escape?”

“I’d have been there yet, if it hadn’t been for a girl there, a
half-Chinese, quarter-white, and quarter-Hawaiian. She was a beauty,
poor thing, and well educated. Her mother, in Honolulu, was worth a
million or so. Well, this girl got me away at last. Her mother financed
the settlement, you see, so the girl wasn’t afraid of being punished
for letting me go. But she made me swear, first, never to reveal the
hiding-place; and I never have. This is the first time I have even
mentioned it. The girl had just the first signs of leprosy. The fingers
of her right hand were slightly twisted, and there was a small spot on
her arm. That was all. I guess she is dead, now.”

“But weren’t you frightened? And weren’t you glad to get away without
catching that dreadful disease?”

“Well,” he confessed, “I was a bit shivery at first; but I got used to
it. I used to feel sorry for that poor girl, though. That made me
forget to be afraid. She was such a beauty, in spirit as well as in
appearance, and she was only slightly touched; yet she was doomed to
lie there, living the life of a primitive savage and rotting slowly
away. Leprosy is far more terrible than you can imagine it.”

“Poor thing,” Ruth murmured softly. “It’s a wonder she let you get
away.”

“How do you mean?” Martin asked unwittingly.

“Because she must have loved you,” Ruth said, still softly. “Candidly,
now, didn’t she?”

Martin’s sunburn had been bleached by his work in the laundry and by
the indoor life he was living, while the hunger and the sickness had
made his face even pale; and across this pallor flowed the slow wave of
a blush. He was opening his mouth to speak, but Ruth shut him off.

“Never mind, don’t answer; it’s not necessary,” she laughed.

But it seemed to him there was something metallic in her laughter, and
that the light in her eyes was cold. On the spur of the moment it
reminded him of a gale he had once experienced in the North Pacific.
And for the moment the apparition of the gale rose before his eyes—a
gale at night, with a clear sky and under a full moon, the huge seas
glinting coldly in the moonlight. Next, he saw the girl in the leper
refuge and remembered it was for love of him that she had let him go.

“She was noble,” he said simply. “She gave me life.”

That was all of the incident, but he heard Ruth muffle a dry sob in her
throat, and noticed that she turned her face away to gaze out of the
window. When she turned it back to him, it was composed, and there was
no hint of the gale in her eyes.

“I’m such a silly,” she said plaintively. “But I can’t help it. I do so
love you, Martin, I do, I do. I shall grow more catholic in time, but
at present I can’t help being jealous of those ghosts of the past, and
you know your past is full of ghosts.”

“It must be,” she silenced his protest. “It could not be otherwise. And
there’s poor Arthur motioning me to come. He’s tired waiting. And now
good-by, dear.”

“There’s some kind of a mixture, put up by the druggists, that helps
men to stop the use of tobacco,” she called back from the door, “and I
am going to send you some.”

The door closed, but opened again.

“I do, I do,” she whispered to him; and this time she was really gone.

Maria, with worshipful eyes that none the less were keen to note the
texture of Ruth’s garments and the cut of them (a cut unknown that
produced an effect mysteriously beautiful), saw her to the carriage.
The crowd of disappointed urchins stared till the carriage disappeared
from view, then transferred their stare to Maria, who had abruptly
become the most important person on the street. But it was one of her
progeny who blasted Maria’s reputation by announcing that the grand
visitors had been for her lodger. After that Maria dropped back into
her old obscurity and Martin began to notice the respectful manner in
which he was regarded by the small fry of the neighborhood. As for
Maria, Martin rose in her estimation a full hundred per cent, and had
the Portuguese grocer witnessed that afternoon carriage-call he would
have allowed Martin an additional three-dollars-and-eighty-five-cents’
worth of credit.




CHAPTER XXVII.


The sun of Martin’s good fortune rose. The day after Ruth’s visit, he
received a check for three dollars from a New York scandal weekly in
payment for three of his triolets. Two days later a newspaper published
in Chicago accepted his “Treasure Hunters,” promising to pay ten
dollars for it on publication. The price was small, but it was the
first article he had written, his very first attempt to express his
thought on the printed page. To cap everything, the adventure serial
for boys, his second attempt, was accepted before the end of the week
by a juvenile monthly calling itself _Youth and Age_. It was true the
serial was twenty-one thousand words, and they offered to pay him
sixteen dollars on publication, which was something like seventy-five
cents a thousand words; but it was equally true that it was the second
thing he had attempted to write and that he was himself thoroughly
aware of its clumsy worthlessness.

But even his earliest efforts were not marked with the clumsiness of
mediocrity. What characterized them was the clumsiness of too great
strength—the clumsiness which the tyro betrays when he crushes
butterflies with battering rams and hammers out vignettes with a
war-club. So it was that Martin was glad to sell his early efforts for
songs. He knew them for what they were, and it had not taken him long
to acquire this knowledge. What he pinned his faith to was his later
work. He had striven to be something more than a mere writer of
magazine fiction. He had sought to equip himself with the tools of
artistry. On the other hand, he had not sacrificed strength. His
conscious aim had been to increase his strength by avoiding excess of
strength. Nor had he departed from his love of reality. His work was
realism, though he had endeavored to fuse with it the fancies and
beauties of imagination. What he sought was an impassioned realism,
shot through with human aspiration and faith. What he wanted was life
as it was, with all its spirit-groping and soul-reaching left in.

He had discovered, in the course of his reading, two schools of
fiction. One treated of man as a god, ignoring his earthly origin; the
other treated of man as a clod, ignoring his heaven-sent dreams and
divine possibilities. Both the god and the clod schools erred, in
Martin’s estimation, and erred through too great singleness of sight
and purpose. There was a compromise that approximated the truth, though
it flattered not the school of god, while it challenged the
brute-savageness of the school of clod. It was his story, “Adventure,”
which had dragged with Ruth, that Martin believed had achieved his
ideal of the true in fiction; and it was in an essay, “God and Clod,”
that he had expressed his views on the whole general subject.

But “Adventure,” and all that he deemed his best work, still went
begging among the editors. His early work counted for nothing in his
eyes except for the money it brought, and his horror stories, two of
which he had sold, he did not consider high work nor his best work. To
him they were frankly imaginative and fantastic, though invested with
all the glamour of the real, wherein lay their power. This investiture
of the grotesque and impossible with reality, he looked upon as a
trick—a skilful trick at best. Great literature could not reside in
such a field. Their artistry was high, but he denied the worthwhileness
of artistry when divorced from humanness. The trick had been to fling
over the face of his artistry a mask of humanness, and this he had done
in the half-dozen or so stories of the horror brand he had written
before he emerged upon the high peaks of “Adventure,” “Joy,” “The Pot,”
and “The Wine of Life.”

The three dollars he received for the triolets he used to eke out a
precarious existence against the arrival of the _White Mouse_ check. He
cashed the first check with the suspicious Portuguese grocer, paying a
dollar on account and dividing the remaining two dollars between the
baker and the fruit store. Martin was not yet rich enough to afford
meat, and he was on slim allowance when the _White Mouse_ check
arrived. He was divided on the cashing of it. He had never been in a
bank in his life, much less been in one on business, and he had a naive
and childlike desire to walk into one of the big banks down in Oakland
and fling down his indorsed check for forty dollars. On the other hand,
practical common sense ruled that he should cash it with his grocer and
thereby make an impression that would later result in an increase of
credit. Reluctantly Martin yielded to the claims of the grocer, paying
his bill with him in full, and receiving in change a pocketful of
jingling coin. Also, he paid the other tradesmen in full, redeemed his
suit and his bicycle, paid one month’s rent on the type-writer, and
paid Maria the overdue month for his room and a month in advance. This
left him in his pocket, for emergencies, a balance of nearly three
dollars.

In itself, this small sum seemed a fortune. Immediately on recovering
his clothes he had gone to see Ruth, and on the way he could not
refrain from jingling the little handful of silver in his pocket. He
had been so long without money that, like a rescued starving man who
cannot let the unconsumed food out of his sight, Martin could not keep
his hand off the silver. He was not mean, nor avaricious, but the money
meant more than so many dollars and cents. It stood for success, and
the eagles stamped upon the coins were to him so many winged victories.

It came to him insensibly that it was a very good world. It certainly
appeared more beautiful to him. For weeks it had been a very dull and
sombre world; but now, with nearly all debts paid, three dollars
jingling in his pocket, and in his mind the consciousness of success,
the sun shone bright and warm, and even a rain-squall that soaked
unprepared pedestrians seemed a merry happening to him. When he
starved, his thoughts had dwelt often upon the thousands he knew were
starving the world over; but now that he was feasted full, the fact of
the thousands starving was no longer pregnant in his brain. He forgot
about them, and, being in love, remembered the countless lovers in the
world. Without deliberately thinking about it, _motifs_ for love-lyrics
began to agitate his brain. Swept away by the creative impulse, he got
off the electric car, without vexation, two blocks beyond his crossing.

He found a number of persons in the Morse home. Ruth’s two girl-cousins
were visiting her from San Rafael, and Mrs. Morse, under pretext of
entertaining them, was pursuing her plan of surrounding Ruth with young
people. The campaign had begun during Martin’s enforced absence, and
was already in full swing. She was making a point of having at the
house men who were doing things. Thus, in addition to the cousins
Dorothy and Florence, Martin encountered two university professors, one
of Latin, the other of English; a young army officer just back from the
Philippines, one-time school-mate of Ruth’s; a young fellow named
Melville, private secretary to Joseph Perkins, head of the San
Francisco Trust Company; and finally of the men, a live bank cashier,
Charles Hapgood, a youngish man of thirty-five, graduate of Stanford
University, member of the Nile Club and the Unity Club, and a
conservative speaker for the Republican Party during campaigns—in
short, a rising young man in every way. Among the women was one who
painted portraits, another who was a professional musician, and still
another who possessed the degree of Doctor of Sociology and who was
locally famous for her social settlement work in the slums of San
Francisco. But the women did not count for much in Mrs. Morse’s plan.
At the best, they were necessary accessories. The men who did things
must be drawn to the house somehow.

“Don’t get excited when you talk,” Ruth admonished Martin, before the
ordeal of introduction began.

He bore himself a bit stiffly at first, oppressed by a sense of his own
awkwardness, especially of his shoulders, which were up to their old
trick of threatening destruction to furniture and ornaments. Also, he
was rendered self-conscious by the company. He had never before been in
contact with such exalted beings nor with so many of them. Melville,
the bank cashier, fascinated him, and he resolved to investigate him at
the first opportunity. For underneath Martin’s awe lurked his assertive
ego, and he felt the urge to measure himself with these men and women
and to find out what they had learned from the books and life which he
had not learned.

Ruth’s eyes roved to him frequently to see how he was getting on, and
she was surprised and gladdened by the ease with which he got
acquainted with her cousins. He certainly did not grow excited, while
being seated removed from him the worry of his shoulders. Ruth knew
them for clever girls, superficially brilliant, and she could scarcely
understand their praise of Martin later that night at going to bed. But
he, on the other hand, a wit in his own class, a gay quizzer and
laughter-maker at dances and Sunday picnics, had found the making of
fun and the breaking of good-natured lances simple enough in this
environment. And on this evening success stood at his back, patting him
on the shoulder and telling him that he was making good, so that he
could afford to laugh and make laughter and remain unabashed.

Later, Ruth’s anxiety found justification. Martin and Professor
Caldwell had got together in a conspicuous corner, and though Martin no
longer wove the air with his hands, to Ruth’s critical eye he permitted
his own eyes to flash and glitter too frequently, talked too rapidly
and warmly, grew too intense, and allowed his aroused blood to redden
his cheeks too much. He lacked decorum and control, and was in decided
contrast to the young professor of English with whom he talked.

But Martin was not concerned with appearances! He had been swift to
note the other’s trained mind and to appreciate his command of
knowledge. Furthermore, Professor Caldwell did not realize Martin’s
concept of the average English professor. Martin wanted him to talk
shop, and, though he seemed averse at first, succeeded in making him do
it. For Martin did not see why a man should not talk shop.

“It’s absurd and unfair,” he had told Ruth weeks before, “this
objection to talking shop. For what reason under the sun do men and
women come together if not for the exchange of the best that is in
them? And the best that is in them is what they are interested in, the
thing by which they make their living, the thing they’ve specialized on
and sat up days and nights over, and even dreamed about. Imagine Mr.
Butler living up to social etiquette and enunciating his views on Paul
Verlaine or the German drama or the novels of D’Annunzio. We’d be bored
to death. I, for one, if I must listen to Mr. Butler, prefer to hear
him talk about his law. It’s the best that is in him, and life is so
short that I want the best of every man and woman I meet.”

“But,” Ruth had objected, “there are the topics of general interest to
all.”

“There, you mistake,” he had rushed on. “All persons in society, all
cliques in society—or, rather, nearly all persons and cliques—ape their
betters. Now, who are the best betters? The idlers, the wealthy idlers.
They do not know, as a rule, the things known by the persons who are
doing something in the world. To listen to conversation about such
things would mean to be bored, wherefore the idlers decree that such
things are shop and must not be talked about. Likewise they decree the
things that are not shop and which may be talked about, and those
things are the latest operas, latest novels, cards, billiards,
cocktails, automobiles, horse shows, trout fishing, tuna-fishing,
big-game shooting, yacht sailing, and so forth—and mark you, these are
the things the idlers know. In all truth, they constitute the shop-talk
of the idlers. And the funniest part of it is that many of the clever
people, and all the would-be clever people, allow the idlers so to
impose upon them. As for me, I want the best a man’s got in him, call
it shop vulgarity or anything you please.”

And Ruth had not understood. This attack of his on the established had
seemed to her just so much wilfulness of opinion.

So Martin contaminated Professor Caldwell with his own earnestness,
challenging him to speak his mind. As Ruth paused beside them she heard
Martin saying:-

“You surely don’t pronounce such heresies in the University of
California?”

Professor Caldwell shrugged his shoulders. “The honest taxpayer and the
politician, you know. Sacramento gives us our appropriations and
therefore we kowtow to Sacramento, and to the Board of Regents, and to
the party press, or to the press of both parties.”

“Yes, that’s clear; but how about you?” Martin urged. “You must be a
fish out of the water.”

“Few like me, I imagine, in the university pond. Sometimes I am fairly
sure I am out of water, and that I should belong in Paris, in Grub
Street, in a hermit’s cave, or in some sadly wild Bohemian crowd,
drinking claret,—dago-red they call it in San Francisco,—dining in
cheap restaurants in the Latin Quarter, and expressing vociferously
radical views upon all creation. Really, I am frequently almost sure
that I was cut out to be a radical. But then, there are so many
questions on which I am not sure. I grow timid when I am face to face
with my human frailty, which ever prevents me from grasping all the
factors in any problem—human, vital problems, you know.”

And as he talked on, Martin became aware that to his own lips had come
the “Song of the Trade Wind”:-

“I am strongest at noon,
But under the moon
    I stiffen the bunt of the sail.”


He was almost humming the words, and it dawned upon him that the other
reminded him of the trade wind, of the Northeast Trade, steady, and
cool, and strong. He was equable, he was to be relied upon, and withal
there was a certain bafflement about him. Martin had the feeling that
he never spoke his full mind, just as he had often had the feeling that
the trades never blew their strongest but always held reserves of
strength that were never used. Martin’s trick of visioning was active
as ever. His brain was a most accessible storehouse of remembered fact
and fancy, and its contents seemed ever ordered and spread for his
inspection. Whatever occurred in the instant present, Martin’s mind
immediately presented associated antithesis or similitude which
ordinarily expressed themselves to him in vision. It was sheerly
automatic, and his visioning was an unfailing accompaniment to the
living present. Just as Ruth’s face, in a momentary jealousy had called
before his eyes a forgotten moonlight gale, and as Professor Caldwell
made him see again the Northeast Trade herding the white billows across
the purple sea, so, from moment to moment, not disconcerting but rather
identifying and classifying, new memory-visions rose before him, or
spread under his eyelids, or were thrown upon the screen of his
consciousness. These visions came out of the actions and sensations of
the past, out of things and events and books of yesterday and last
week—a countless host of apparitions that, waking or sleeping, forever
thronged his mind.

So it was, as he listened to Professor Caldwell’s easy flow of
speech—the conversation of a clever, cultured man—that Martin kept
seeing himself down all his past. He saw himself when he had been quite
the hoodlum, wearing a “stiff-rim” Stetson hat and a square-cut,
double-breasted coat, with a certain swagger to the shoulders and
possessing the ideal of being as tough as the police permitted. He did
not disguise it to himself, nor attempt to palliate it. At one time in
his life he had been just a common hoodlum, the leader of a gang that
worried the police and terrorized honest, working-class householders.
But his ideals had changed. He glanced about him at the well-bred,
well-dressed men and women, and breathed into his lungs the atmosphere
of culture and refinement, and at the same moment the ghost of his
early youth, in stiff-rim and square-cut, with swagger and toughness,
stalked across the room. This figure, of the corner hoodlum, he saw
merge into himself, sitting and talking with an actual university
professor.

For, after all, he had never found his permanent abiding place. He had
fitted in wherever he found himself, been a favorite always and
everywhere by virtue of holding his own at work and at play and by his
willingness and ability to fight for his rights and command respect.
But he had never taken root. He had fitted in sufficiently to satisfy
his fellows but not to satisfy himself. He had been perturbed always by
a feeling of unrest, had heard always the call of something from
beyond, and had wandered on through life seeking it until he found
books and art and love. And here he was, in the midst of all this, the
only one of all the comrades he had adventured with who could have made
themselves eligible for the inside of the Morse home.

But such thoughts and visions did not prevent him from following
Professor Caldwell closely. And as he followed, comprehendingly and
critically, he noted the unbroken field of the other’s knowledge. As
for himself, from moment to moment the conversation showed him gaps and
open stretches, whole subjects with which he was unfamiliar.
Nevertheless, thanks to his Spencer, he saw that he possessed the
outlines of the field of knowledge. It was a matter only of time, when
he would fill in the outline. Then watch out, he thought—’ware shoal,
everybody! He felt like sitting at the feet of the professor,
worshipful and absorbent; but, as he listened, he began to discern a
weakness in the other’s judgments—a weakness so stray and elusive that
he might not have caught it had it not been ever present. And when he
did catch it, he leapt to equality at once.

Ruth came up to them a second time, just as Martin began to speak.

“I’ll tell you where you are wrong, or, rather, what weakens your
judgments,” he said. “You lack biology. It has no place in your scheme
of things.—Oh, I mean the real interpretative biology, from the ground
up, from the laboratory and the test-tube and the vitalized inorganic
right on up to the widest aesthetic and sociological generalizations.”

Ruth was appalled. She had sat two lecture courses under Professor
Caldwell and looked up to him as the living repository of all
knowledge.

“I scarcely follow you,” he said dubiously.

Martin was not so sure but what he had followed him.

“Then I’ll try to explain,” he said. “I remember reading in Egyptian
history something to the effect that understanding could not be had of
Egyptian art without first studying the land question.”

“Quite right,” the professor nodded.

“And it seems to me,” Martin continued, “that knowledge of the land
question, in turn, of all questions, for that matter, cannot be had
without previous knowledge of the stuff and the constitution of life.
How can we understand laws and institutions, religions and customs,
without understanding, not merely the nature of the creatures that made
them, but the nature of the stuff out of which the creatures are made?
Is literature less human than the architecture and sculpture of Egypt?
Is there one thing in the known universe that is not subject to the law
of evolution?—Oh, I know there is an elaborate evolution of the various
arts laid down, but it seems to me to be too mechanical. The human
himself is left out. The evolution of the tool, of the harp, of music
and song and dance, are all beautifully elaborated; but how about the
evolution of the human himself, the development of the basic and
intrinsic parts that were in him before he made his first tool or
gibbered his first chant? It is that which you do not consider, and
which I call biology. It is biology in its largest aspects.

“I know I express myself incoherently, but I’ve tried to hammer out the
idea. It came to me as you were talking, so I was not primed and ready
to deliver it. You spoke yourself of the human frailty that prevented
one from taking all the factors into consideration. And you, in
turn,—or so it seems to me,—leave out the biological factor, the very
stuff out of which has been spun the fabric of all the arts, the warp
and the woof of all human actions and achievements.”

To Ruth’s amazement, Martin was not immediately crushed, and that the
professor replied in the way he did struck her as forbearance for
Martin’s youth. Professor Caldwell sat for a full minute, silent and
fingering his watch chain.

“Do you know,” he said at last, “I’ve had that same criticism passed on
me once before—by a very great man, a scientist and evolutionist,
Joseph Le Conte. But he is dead, and I thought to remain undetected;
and now you come along and expose me. Seriously, though—and this is
confession—I think there is something in your contention—a great deal,
in fact. I am too classical, not enough up-to-date in the
interpretative branches of science, and I can only plead the
disadvantages of my education and a temperamental slothfulness that
prevents me from doing the work. I wonder if you’ll believe that I’ve
never been inside a physics or chemistry laboratory? It is true,
nevertheless. Le Conte was right, and so are you, Mr. Eden, at least to
an extent—how much I do not know.”

Ruth drew Martin away with her on a pretext; when she had got him
aside, whispering:-

“You shouldn’t have monopolized Professor Caldwell that way. There may
be others who want to talk with him.”

“My mistake,” Martin admitted contritely. “But I’d got him stirred up,
and he was so interesting that I did not think. Do you know, he is the
brightest, the most intellectual, man I have ever talked with. And I’ll
tell you something else. I once thought that everybody who went to
universities, or who sat in the high places in society, was just as
brilliant and intelligent as he.”

“He’s an exception,” she answered.

“I should say so. Whom do you want me to talk to now?—Oh, say, bring me
up against that cashier-fellow.”

Martin talked for fifteen minutes with him, nor could Ruth have wished
better behavior on her lover’s part. Not once did his eyes flash nor
his cheeks flush, while the calmness and poise with which he talked
surprised her. But in Martin’s estimation the whole tribe of bank
cashiers fell a few hundred per cent, and for the rest of the evening
he labored under the impression that bank cashiers and talkers of
platitudes were synonymous phrases. The army officer he found
good-natured and simple, a healthy, wholesome young fellow, content to
occupy the place in life into which birth and luck had flung him. On
learning that he had completed two years in the university, Martin was
puzzled to know where he had stored it away. Nevertheless Martin liked
him better than the platitudinous bank cashier.

“I really don’t object to platitudes,” he told Ruth later; “but what
worries me into nervousness is the pompous, smugly complacent, superior
certitude with which they are uttered and the time taken to do it. Why,
I could give that man the whole history of the Reformation in the time
he took to tell me that the Union-Labor Party had fused with the
Democrats. Do you know, he skins his words as a professional
poker-player skins the cards that are dealt out to him. Some day I’ll
show you what I mean.”

“I’m sorry you don’t like him,” was her reply. “He’s a favorite of Mr.
Butler’s. Mr. Butler says he is safe and honest—calls him the Rock,
Peter, and says that upon him any banking institution can well be
built.”

“I don’t doubt it—from the little I saw of him and the less I heard
from him; but I don’t think so much of banks as I did. You don’t mind
my speaking my mind this way, dear?”

“No, no; it is most interesting.”

“Yes,” Martin went on heartily, “I’m no more than a barbarian getting
my first impressions of civilization. Such impressions must be
entertainingly novel to the civilized person.”

“What did you think of my cousins?” Ruth queried.

“I liked them better than the other women. There’s plenty of fun in
them along with paucity of pretence.”

“Then you did like the other women?”

He shook his head.

“That social-settlement woman is no more than a sociological
poll-parrot. I swear, if you winnowed her out between the stars, like
Tomlinson, there would be found in her not one original thought. As for
the portrait-painter, she was a positive bore. She’d make a good wife
for the cashier. And the musician woman! I don’t care how nimble her
fingers are, how perfect her technique, how wonderful her
expression—the fact is, she knows nothing about music.”

“She plays beautifully,” Ruth protested.

“Yes, she’s undoubtedly gymnastic in the externals of music, but the
intrinsic spirit of music is unguessed by her. I asked her what music
meant to her—you know I’m always curious to know that particular thing;
and she did not know what it meant to her, except that she adored it,
that it was the greatest of the arts, and that it meant more than life
to her.”

“You were making them talk shop,” Ruth charged him.

“I confess it. And if they were failures on shop, imagine my sufferings
if they had discoursed on other subjects. Why, I used to think that up
here, where all the advantages of culture were enjoyed—” He paused for
a moment, and watched the youthful shade of himself, in stiff-rim and
square-cut, enter the door and swagger across the room. “As I was
saying, up here I thought all men and women were brilliant and radiant.
But now, from what little I’ve seen of them, they strike me as a pack
of ninnies, most of them, and ninety percent of the remainder as bores.
Now there’s Professor Caldwell—he’s different. He’s a man, every inch
of him and every atom of his gray matter.”

Ruth’s face brightened.

“Tell me about him,” she urged. “Not what is large and brilliant—I know
those qualities; but whatever you feel is adverse. I am most curious to
know.”

“Perhaps I’ll get myself in a pickle.” Martin debated humorously for a
moment. “Suppose you tell me first. Or maybe you find in him nothing
less than the best.”

“I attended two lecture courses under him, and I have known him for two
years; that is why I am anxious for your first impression.”

“Bad impression, you mean? Well, here goes. He is all the fine things
you think about him, I guess. At least, he is the finest specimen of
intellectual man I have met; but he is a man with a secret shame.”

“Oh, no, no!” he hastened to cry. “Nothing paltry nor vulgar. What I
mean is that he strikes me as a man who has gone to the bottom of
things, and is so afraid of what he saw that he makes believe to
himself that he never saw it. Perhaps that’s not the clearest way to
express it. Here’s another way. A man who has found the path to the
hidden temple but has not followed it; who has, perhaps, caught
glimpses of the temple and striven afterward to convince himself that
it was only a mirage of foliage. Yet another way. A man who could have
done things but who placed no value on the doing, and who, all the
time, in his innermost heart, is regretting that he has not done them;
who has secretly laughed at the rewards for doing, and yet, still more
secretly, has yearned for the rewards and for the joy of doing.”

“I don’t read him that way,” she said. “And for that matter, I don’t
see just what you mean.”

“It is only a vague feeling on my part,” Martin temporized. “I have no
reason for it. It is only a feeling, and most likely it is wrong. You
certainly should know him better than I.”

From the evening at Ruth’s Martin brought away with him strange
confusions and conflicting feelings. He was disappointed in his goal,
in the persons he had climbed to be with. On the other hand, he was
encouraged with his success. The climb had been easier than he
expected. He was superior to the climb, and (he did not, with false
modesty, hide it from himself) he was superior to the beings among whom
he had climbed—with the exception, of course, of Professor Caldwell.
About life and the books he knew more than they, and he wondered into
what nooks and crannies they had cast aside their educations. He did
not know that he was himself possessed of unusual brain vigor; nor did
he know that the persons who were given to probing the depths and to
thinking ultimate thoughts were not to be found in the drawing rooms of
the world’s Morses; nor did he dream that such persons were as lonely
eagles sailing solitary in the azure sky far above the earth and its
swarming freight of gregarious life.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


But success had lost Martin’s address, and her messengers no longer
came to his door. For twenty-five days, working Sundays and holidays,
he toiled on “The Shame of the Sun,” a long essay of some thirty
thousand words. It was a deliberate attack on the mysticism of the
Maeterlinck school—an attack from the citadel of positive science upon
the wonder-dreamers, but an attack nevertheless that retained much of
beauty and wonder of the sort compatible with ascertained fact. It was
a little later that he followed up the attack with two short essays,
“The Wonder-Dreamers” and “The Yardstick of the Ego.” And on essays,
long and short, he began to pay the travelling expenses from magazine
to magazine.

During the twenty-five days spent on “The Shame of the Sun,” he sold
hack-work to the extent of six dollars and fifty cents. A joke had
brought in fifty cents, and a second one, sold to a high-grade comic
weekly, had fetched a dollar. Then two humorous poems had earned two
dollars and three dollars respectively. As a result, having exhausted
his credit with the tradesmen (though he had increased his credit with
the grocer to five dollars), his wheel and suit of clothes went back to
the pawnbroker. The type-writer people were again clamoring for money,
insistently pointing out that according to the agreement rent was to be
paid strictly in advance.

Encouraged by his several small sales, Martin went back to hack-work.
Perhaps there was a living in it, after all. Stored away under his
table were the twenty storiettes which had been rejected by the
newspaper short-story syndicate. He read them over in order to find out
how not to write newspaper storiettes, and so doing, reasoned out the
perfect formula. He found that the newspaper storiette should never be
tragic, should never end unhappily, and should never contain beauty of
language, subtlety of thought, nor real delicacy of sentiment.
Sentiment it must contain, plenty of it, pure and noble, of the sort
that in his own early youth had brought his applause from “nigger
heaven”—the “For-God-my-country-and-the-Czar” and
“I-may-be-poor-but-I-am-honest” brand of sentiment.

Having learned such precautions, Martin consulted “The Duchess” for
tone, and proceeded to mix according to formula. The formula consists
of three parts: (1) a pair of lovers are jarred apart; (2) by some deed
or event they are reunited; (3) marriage bells. The third part was an
unvarying quantity, but the first and second parts could be varied an
infinite number of times. Thus, the pair of lovers could be jarred
apart by misunderstood motives, by accident of fate, by jealous rivals,
by irate parents, by crafty guardians, by scheming relatives, and so
forth and so forth; they could be reunited by a brave deed of the man
lover, by a similar deed of the woman lover, by change of heart in one
lover or the other, by forced confession of crafty guardian, scheming
relative, or jealous rival, by voluntary confession of same, by
discovery of some unguessed secret, by lover storming girl’s heart, by
lover making long and noble self-sacrifice, and so on, endlessly. It
was very fetching to make the girl propose in the course of being
reunited, and Martin discovered, bit by bit, other decidedly piquant
and fetching ruses. But marriage bells at the end was the one thing he
could take no liberties with; though the heavens rolled up as a scroll
and the stars fell, the wedding bells must go on ringing just the same.
In quantity, the formula prescribed twelve hundred words minimum dose,
fifteen hundred words maximum dose.

Before he got very far along in the art of the storiette, Martin worked
out half a dozen stock forms, which he always consulted when
constructing storiettes. These forms were like the cunning tables used
by mathematicians, which may be entered from top, bottom, right, and
left, which entrances consist of scores of lines and dozens of columns,
and from which may be drawn, without reasoning or thinking, thousands
of different conclusions, all unchallengably precise and true. Thus, in
the course of half an hour with his forms, Martin could frame up a
dozen or so storiettes, which he put aside and filled in at his
convenience. He found that he could fill one in, after a day of serious
work, in the hour before going to bed. As he later confessed to Ruth,
he could almost do it in his sleep. The real work was in constructing
the frames, and that was merely mechanical.

He had no doubt whatever of the efficacy of his formula, and for once
he knew the editorial mind when he said positively to himself that the
first two he sent off would bring checks. And checks they brought, for
four dollars each, at the end of twelve days.

In the meantime he was making fresh and alarming discoveries concerning
the magazines. Though the _Transcontinental_ had published “The Ring of
Bells,” no check was forthcoming. Martin needed it, and he wrote for
it. An evasive answer and a request for more of his work was all he
received. He had gone hungry two days waiting for the reply, and it was
then that he put his wheel back in pawn. He wrote regularly, twice a
week, to the _Transcontinental_ for his five dollars, though it was
only semi-occasionally that he elicited a reply. He did not know that
the _Transcontinental_ had been staggering along precariously for
years, that it was a fourth-rater, or tenth-rater, without standing,
with a crazy circulation that partly rested on petty bullying and
partly on patriotic appealing, and with advertisements that were
scarcely more than charitable donations. Nor did he know that the
_Transcontinental_ was the sole livelihood of the editor and the
business manager, and that they could wring their livelihood out of it
only by moving to escape paying rent and by never paying any bill they
could evade. Nor could he have guessed that the particular five dollars
that belonged to him had been appropriated by the business manager for
the painting of his house in Alameda, which painting he performed
himself, on week-day afternoons, because he could not afford to pay
union wages and because the first scab he had employed had had a ladder
jerked out from under him and been sent to the hospital with a broken
collar-bone.

The ten dollars for which Martin had sold “Treasure Hunters” to the
Chicago newspaper did not come to hand. The article had been published,
as he had ascertained at the file in the Central Reading-room, but no
word could he get from the editor. His letters were ignored. To satisfy
himself that they had been received, he registered several of them. It
was nothing less than robbery, he concluded—a cold-blooded steal; while
he starved, he was pilfered of his merchandise, of his goods, the sale
of which was the sole way of getting bread to eat.

_Youth and Age_ was a weekly, and it had published two-thirds of his
twenty-one-thousand-word serial when it went out of business. With it
went all hopes of getting his sixteen dollars.

To cap the situation, “The Pot,” which he looked upon as one of the
best things he had written, was lost to him. In despair, casting about
frantically among the magazines, he had sent it to _The Billow_, a
society weekly in San Francisco. His chief reason for submitting it to
that publication was that, having only to travel across the bay from
Oakland, a quick decision could be reached. Two weeks later he was
overjoyed to see, in the latest number on the news-stand, his story
printed in full, illustrated, and in the place of honor. He went home
with leaping pulse, wondering how much they would pay him for one of
the best things he had done. Also, the celerity with which it had been
accepted and published was a pleasant thought to him. That the editor
had not informed him of the acceptance made the surprise more complete.
After waiting a week, two weeks, and half a week longer, desperation
conquered diffidence, and he wrote to the editor of _The Billow_,
suggesting that possibly through some negligence of the business
manager his little account had been overlooked.

Even if it isn’t more than five dollars, Martin thought to himself, it
will buy enough beans and pea-soup to enable me to write half a dozen
like it, and possibly as good.

Back came a cool letter from the editor that at least elicited Martin’s
admiration.

“We thank you,” it ran, “for your excellent contribution. All of us in
the office enjoyed it immensely, and, as you see, it was given the
place of honor and immediate publication. We earnestly hope that you
liked the illustrations.

“On rereading your letter it seems to us that you are laboring under
the misapprehension that we pay for unsolicited manuscripts. This is
not our custom, and of course yours was unsolicited. We assumed,
naturally, when we received your story, that you understood the
situation. We can only deeply regret this unfortunate misunderstanding,
and assure you of our unfailing regard. Again, thanking you for your
kind contribution, and hoping to receive more from you in the near
future, we remain, etc.”

There was also a postscript to the effect that though _The Billow_
carried no free-list, it took great pleasure in sending him a
complimentary subscription for the ensuing year.

After that experience, Martin typed at the top of the first sheet of
all his manuscripts: “Submitted at your usual rate.”

Some day, he consoled himself, they will be submitted at _my_ usual
rate.

He discovered in himself, at this period, a passion for perfection,
under the sway of which he rewrote and polished “The Jostling Street,”
“The Wine of Life,” “Joy,” the “Sea Lyrics,” and others of his earlier
work. As of old, nineteen hours of labor a day was all too little to
suit him. He wrote prodigiously, and he read prodigiously, forgetting
in his toil the pangs caused by giving up his tobacco. Ruth’s promised
cure for the habit, flamboyantly labelled, he stowed away in the most
inaccessible corner of his bureau. Especially during his stretches of
famine he suffered from lack of the weed; but no matter how often he
mastered the craving, it remained with him as strong as ever. He
regarded it as the biggest thing he had ever achieved. Ruth’s point of
view was that he was doing no more than was right. She brought him the
anti-tobacco remedy, purchased out of her glove money, and in a few
days forgot all about it.

His machine-made storiettes, though he hated them and derided them,
were successful. By means of them he redeemed all his pledges, paid
most of his bills, and bought a new set of tires for his wheel. The
storiettes at least kept the pot a-boiling and gave him time for
ambitious work; while the one thing that upheld him was the forty
dollars he had received from _The White Mouse_. He anchored his faith
to that, and was confident that the really first-class magazines would
pay an unknown writer at least an equal rate, if not a better one. But
the thing was, how to get into the first-class magazines. His best
stories, essays, and poems went begging among them, and yet, each
month, he read reams of dull, prosy, inartistic stuff between all their
various covers. If only one editor, he sometimes thought, would descend
from his high seat of pride to write me one cheering line! No matter if
my work is unusual, no matter if it is unfit, for prudential reasons,
for their pages, surely there must be some sparks in it, somewhere, a
few, to warm them to some sort of appreciation. And thereupon he would
get out one or another of his manuscripts, such as “Adventure,” and
read it over and over in a vain attempt to vindicate the editorial
silence.

As the sweet California spring came on, his period of plenty came to an
end. For several weeks he had been worried by a strange silence on the
part of the newspaper storiette syndicate. Then, one day, came back to
him through the mail ten of his immaculate machine-made storiettes.
They were accompanied by a brief letter to the effect that the
syndicate was overstocked, and that some months would elapse before it
would be in the market again for manuscripts. Martin had even been
extravagant on the strength of those ten storiettes. Toward the last
the syndicate had been paying him five dollars each for them and
accepting every one he sent. So he had looked upon the ten as good as
sold, and he had lived accordingly, on a basis of fifty dollars in the
bank. So it was that he entered abruptly upon a lean period, wherein he
continued selling his earlier efforts to publications that would not
pay and submitting his later work to magazines that would not buy.
Also, he resumed his trips to the pawn-broker down in Oakland. A few
jokes and snatches of humorous verse, sold to the New York weeklies,
made existence barely possible for him. It was at this time that he
wrote letters of inquiry to the several great monthly and quarterly
reviews, and learned in reply that they rarely considered unsolicited
articles, and that most of their contents were written upon order by
well-known specialists who were authorities in their various fields.




CHAPTER XXIX.


It was a hard summer for Martin. Manuscript readers and editors were
away on vacation, and publications that ordinarily returned a decision
in three weeks now retained his manuscript for three months or more.
The consolation he drew from it was that a saving in postage was
effected by the deadlock. Only the robber-publications seemed to remain
actively in business, and to them Martin disposed of all his early
efforts, such as “Pearl-diving,” “The Sea as a Career,”
“Turtle-catching,” and “The Northeast Trades.” For these manuscripts he
never received a penny. It is true, after six months’ correspondence,
he effected a compromise, whereby he received a safety razor for
“Turtle-catching,” and that _The Acropolis_, having agreed to give him
five dollars cash and five yearly subscriptions: for “The Northeast
Trades,” fulfilled the second part of the agreement.

For a sonnet on Stevenson he managed to wring two dollars out of a
Boston editor who was running a magazine with a Matthew Arnold taste
and a penny-dreadful purse. “The Peri and the Pearl,” a clever skit of
a poem of two hundred lines, just finished, white hot from his brain,
won the heart of the editor of a San Francisco magazine published in
the interest of a great railroad. When the editor wrote, offering him
payment in transportation, Martin wrote back to inquire if the
transportation was transferable. It was not, and so, being prevented
from peddling it, he asked for the return of the poem. Back it came,
with the editor’s regrets, and Martin sent it to San Francisco again,
this time to _The Hornet_, a pretentious monthly that had been fanned
into a constellation of the first magnitude by the brilliant journalist
who founded it. But _The Hornet’s_ light had begun to dim long before
Martin was born. The editor promised Martin fifteen dollars for the
poem, but, when it was published, seemed to forget about it. Several of
his letters being ignored, Martin indicted an angry one which drew a
reply. It was written by a new editor, who coolly informed Martin that
he declined to be held responsible for the old editor’s mistakes, and
that he did not think much of “The Peri and the Pearl” anyway.

But _The Globe_, a Chicago magazine, gave Martin the most cruel
treatment of all. He had refrained from offering his “Sea Lyrics” for
publication, until driven to it by starvation. After having been
rejected by a dozen magazines, they had come to rest in _The Globe_
office. There were thirty poems in the collection, and he was to
receive a dollar apiece for them. The first month four were published,
and he promptly received a check for four dollars; but when he looked
over the magazine, he was appalled at the slaughter. In some cases the
titles had been altered: “Finis,” for instance, being changed to “The
Finish,” and “The Song of the Outer Reef” to “The Song of the Coral
Reef.” In one case, an absolutely different title, a misappropriate
title, was substituted. In place of his own, “Medusa Lights,” the
editor had printed, “The Backward Track.” But the slaughter in the body
of the poems was terrifying. Martin groaned and sweated and thrust his
hands through his hair. Phrases, lines, and stanzas were cut out,
interchanged, or juggled about in the most incomprehensible manner.
Sometimes lines and stanzas not his own were substituted for his. He
could not believe that a sane editor could be guilty of such
maltreatment, and his favorite hypothesis was that his poems must have
been doctored by the office boy or the stenographer. Martin wrote
immediately, begging the editor to cease publishing the lyrics and to
return them to him.

He wrote again and again, begging, entreating, threatening, but his
letters were ignored. Month by month the slaughter went on till the
thirty poems were published, and month by month he received a check for
those which had appeared in the current number.

Despite these various misadventures, the memory of the _White Mouse_
forty-dollar check sustained him, though he was driven more and more to
hack-work. He discovered a bread-and-butter field in the agricultural
weeklies and trade journals, though among the religious weeklies he
found he could easily starve. At his lowest ebb, when his black suit
was in pawn, he made a ten-strike—or so it seemed to him—in a prize
contest arranged by the County Committee of the Republican Party. There
were three branches of the contest, and he entered them all, laughing
at himself bitterly the while in that he was driven to such straits to
live. His poem won the first prize of ten dollars, his campaign song
the second prize of five dollars, his essay on the principles of the
Republican Party the first prize of twenty-five dollars. Which was very
gratifying to him until he tried to collect. Something had gone wrong
in the County Committee, and, though a rich banker and a state senator
were members of it, the money was not forthcoming. While this affair
was hanging fire, he proved that he understood the principles of the
Democratic Party by winning the first prize for his essay in a similar
contest. And, moreover, he received the money, twenty-five dollars. But
the forty dollars won in the first contest he never received.

Driven to shifts in order to see Ruth, and deciding that the long walk
from north Oakland to her house and back again consumed too much time,
he kept his black suit in pawn in place of his bicycle. The latter gave
him exercise, saved him hours of time for work, and enabled him to see
Ruth just the same. A pair of knee duck trousers and an old sweater
made him a presentable wheel costume, so that he could go with Ruth on
afternoon rides. Besides, he no longer had opportunity to see much of
her in her own home, where Mrs. Morse was thoroughly prosecuting her
campaign of entertainment. The exalted beings he met there, and to whom
he had looked up but a short time before, now bored him. They were no
longer exalted. He was nervous and irritable, what of his hard times,
disappointments, and close application to work, and the conversation of
such people was maddening. He was not unduly egotistic. He measured the
narrowness of their minds by the minds of the thinkers in the books he
read. At Ruth’s home he never met a large mind, with the exception of
Professor Caldwell, and Caldwell he had met there only once. As for the
rest, they were numskulls, ninnies, superficial, dogmatic, and
ignorant. It was their ignorance that astounded him. What was the
matter with them? What had they done with their educations? They had
had access to the same books he had. How did it happen that they had
drawn nothing from them?

He knew that the great minds, the deep and rational thinkers, existed.
He had his proofs from the books, the books that had educated him
beyond the Morse standard. And he knew that higher intellects than
those of the Morse circle were to be found in the world. He read
English society novels, wherein he caught glimpses of men and women
talking politics and philosophy. And he read of salons in great cities,
even in the United States, where art and intellect congregated.
Foolishly, in the past, he had conceived that all well-groomed persons
above the working class were persons with power of intellect and vigor
of beauty. Culture and collars had gone together, to him, and he had
been deceived into believing that college educations and mastery were
the same things.

Well, he would fight his way on and up higher. And he would take Ruth
with him. Her he dearly loved, and he was confident that she would
shine anywhere. As it was clear to him that he had been handicapped by
his early environment, so now he perceived that she was similarly
handicapped. She had not had a chance to expand. The books on her
father’s shelves, the paintings on the walls, the music on the
piano—all was just so much meretricious display. To real literature,
real painting, real music, the Morses and their kind, were dead. And
bigger than such things was life, of which they were densely,
hopelessly ignorant. In spite of their Unitarian proclivities and their
masks of conservative broadmindedness, they were two generations behind
interpretative science: their mental processes were mediaeval, while
their thinking on the ultimate data of existence and of the universe
struck him as the same metaphysical method that was as young as the
youngest race, as old as the cave-man, and older—the same that moved
the first Pleistocene ape-man to fear the dark; that moved the first
hasty Hebrew savage to incarnate Eve from Adam’s rib; that moved
Descartes to build an idealistic system of the universe out of the
projections of his own puny ego; and that moved the famous British
ecclesiastic to denounce evolution in satire so scathing as to win
immediate applause and leave his name a notorious scrawl on the page of
history.

So Martin thought, and he thought further, till it dawned upon him that
the difference between these lawyers, officers, business men, and bank
cashiers he had met and the members of the working class he had known
was on a par with the difference in the food they ate, clothes they
wore, neighborhoods in which they lived. Certainly, in all of them was
lacking the something more which he found in himself and in the books.
The Morses had shown him the best their social position could produce,
and he was not impressed by it. A pauper himself, a slave to the
money-lender, he knew himself the superior of those he met at the
Morses’; and, when his one decent suit of clothes was out of pawn, he
moved among them a lord of life, quivering with a sense of outrage akin
to what a prince would suffer if condemned to live with goat-herds.

“You hate and fear the socialists,” he remarked to Mr. Morse, one
evening at dinner; “but why? You know neither them nor their
doctrines.”

The conversation had been swung in that direction by Mrs. Morse, who
had been invidiously singing the praises of Mr. Hapgood. The cashier
was Martin’s black beast, and his temper was a trifle short where the
talker of platitudes was concerned.

“Yes,” he had said, “Charley Hapgood is what they call a rising young
man—somebody told me as much. And it is true. He’ll make the Governor’s
Chair before he dies, and, who knows? maybe the United States Senate.”

“What makes you think so?” Mrs. Morse had inquired.

“I’ve heard him make a campaign speech. It was so cleverly stupid and
unoriginal, and also so convincing, that the leaders cannot help but
regard him as safe and sure, while his platitudes are so much like the
platitudes of the average voter that—oh, well, you know you flatter any
man by dressing up his own thoughts for him and presenting them to
him.”

“I actually think you are jealous of Mr. Hapgood,” Ruth had chimed in.

“Heaven forbid!”

The look of horror on Martin’s face stirred Mrs. Morse to belligerence.

“You surely don’t mean to say that Mr. Hapgood is stupid?” she demanded
icily.

“No more than the average Republican,” was the retort, “or average
Democrat, either. They are all stupid when they are not crafty, and
very few of them are crafty. The only wise Republicans are the
millionnaires and their conscious henchmen. They know which side their
bread is buttered on, and they know why.”

“I am a Republican,” Mr. Morse put in lightly. “Pray, how do you
classify me?”

“Oh, you are an unconscious henchman.”

“Henchman?”

“Why, yes. You do corporation work. You have no working-class nor
criminal practice. You don’t depend upon wife-beaters and pickpockets
for your income. You get your livelihood from the masters of society,
and whoever feeds a man is that man’s master. Yes, you are a henchman.
You are interested in advancing the interests of the aggregations of
capital you serve.”

Mr. Morse’s face was a trifle red.

“I confess, sir,” he said, “that you talk like a scoundrelly
socialist.”

Then it was that Martin made his remark:

“You hate and fear the socialists; but why? You know neither them nor
their doctrines.”

“Your doctrine certainly sounds like socialism,” Mr. Morse replied,
while Ruth gazed anxiously from one to the other, and Mrs. Morse beamed
happily at the opportunity afforded of rousing her liege lord’s
antagonism.

“Because I say Republicans are stupid, and hold that liberty, equality,
and fraternity are exploded bubbles, does not make me a socialist,”
Martin said with a smile. “Because I question Jefferson and the
unscientific Frenchmen who informed his mind, does not make me a
socialist. Believe me, Mr. Morse, you are far nearer socialism than I
who am its avowed enemy.”

“Now you please to be facetious,” was all the other could say.

“Not at all. I speak in all seriousness. You still believe in equality,
and yet you do the work of the corporations, and the corporations, from
day to day, are busily engaged in burying equality. And you call me a
socialist because I deny equality, because I affirm just what you live
up to. The Republicans are foes to equality, though most of them fight
the battle against equality with the very word itself the slogan on
their lips. In the name of equality they destroy equality. That was why
I called them stupid. As for myself, I am an individualist. I believe
the race is to the swift, the battle to the strong. Such is the lesson
I have learned from biology, or at least think I have learned. As I
said, I am an individualist, and individualism is the hereditary and
eternal foe of socialism.”

“But you frequent socialist meetings,” Mr. Morse challenged.

“Certainly, just as spies frequent hostile camps. How else are you to
learn about the enemy? Besides, I enjoy myself at their meetings. They
are good fighters, and, right or wrong, they have read the books. Any
one of them knows far more about sociology and all the other ologies
than the average captain of industry. Yes, I have been to half a dozen
of their meetings, but that doesn’t make me a socialist any more than
hearing Charley Hapgood orate made me a Republican.”

“I can’t help it,” Mr. Morse said feebly, “but I still believe you
incline that way.”

Bless me, Martin thought to himself, he doesn’t know what I was talking
about. He hasn’t understood a word of it. What did he do with his
education, anyway?

Thus, in his development, Martin found himself face to face with
economic morality, or the morality of class; and soon it became to him
a grisly monster. Personally, he was an intellectual moralist, and more
offending to him than platitudinous pomposity was the morality of those
about him, which was a curious hotchpotch of the economic, the
metaphysical, the sentimental, and the imitative.

A sample of this curious messy mixture he encountered nearer home. His
sister Marian had been keeping company with an industrious young
mechanic, of German extraction, who, after thoroughly learning the
trade, had set up for himself in a bicycle-repair shop. Also, having
got the agency for a low-grade make of wheel, he was prosperous. Marian
had called on Martin in his room a short time before to announce her
engagement, during which visit she had playfully inspected Martin’s
palm and told his fortune. On her next visit she brought Hermann von
Schmidt along with her. Martin did the honors and congratulated both of
them in language so easy and graceful as to affect disagreeably the
peasant-mind of his sister’s lover. This bad impression was further
heightened by Martin’s reading aloud the half-dozen stanzas of verse
with which he had commemorated Marian’s previous visit. It was a bit of
society verse, airy and delicate, which he had named “The Palmist.” He
was surprised, when he finished reading it, to note no enjoyment in his
sister’s face. Instead, her eyes were fixed anxiously upon her
betrothed, and Martin, following her gaze, saw spread on that worthy’s
asymmetrical features nothing but black and sullen disapproval. The
incident passed over, they made an early departure, and Martin forgot
all about it, though for the moment he had been puzzled that any woman,
even of the working class, should not have been flattered and delighted
by having poetry written about her.

Several evenings later Marian again visited him, this time alone. Nor
did she waste time in coming to the point, upbraiding him sorrowfully
for what he had done.

“Why, Marian,” he chided, “you talk as though you were ashamed of your
relatives, or of your brother at any rate.”

“And I am, too,” she blurted out.

Martin was bewildered by the tears of mortification he saw in her eyes.
The mood, whatever it was, was genuine.

“But, Marian, why should your Hermann be jealous of my writing poetry
about my own sister?”

“He ain’t jealous,” she sobbed. “He says it was indecent, ob—obscene.”

Martin emitted a long, low whistle of incredulity, then proceeded to
resurrect and read a carbon copy of “The Palmist.”

“I can’t see it,” he said finally, proffering the manuscript to her.
“Read it yourself and show me whatever strikes you as obscene—that was
the word, wasn’t it?”

“He says so, and he ought to know,” was the answer, with a wave aside
of the manuscript, accompanied by a look of loathing. “And he says
you’ve got to tear it up. He says he won’t have no wife of his with
such things written about her which anybody can read. He says it’s a
disgrace, an’ he won’t stand for it.”

“Now, look here, Marian, this is nothing but nonsense,” Martin began;
then abruptly changed his mind.

He saw before him an unhappy girl, knew the futility of attempting to
convince her husband or her, and, though the whole situation was absurd
and preposterous, he resolved to surrender.

“All right,” he announced, tearing the manuscript into half a dozen
pieces and throwing it into the waste-basket.

He contented himself with the knowledge that even then the original
type-written manuscript was reposing in the office of a New York
magazine. Marian and her husband would never know, and neither himself
nor they nor the world would lose if the pretty, harmless poem ever
were published.

Marian, starting to reach into the waste-basket, refrained.

“Can I?” she pleaded.

He nodded his head, regarding her thoughtfully as she gathered the torn
pieces of manuscript and tucked them into the pocket of her
jacket—ocular evidence of the success of her mission. She reminded him
of Lizzie Connolly, though there was less of fire and gorgeous
flaunting life in her than in that other girl of the working class whom
he had seen twice. But they were on a par, the pair of them, in dress
and carriage, and he smiled with inward amusement at the caprice of his
fancy which suggested the appearance of either of them in Mrs. Morse’s
drawing-room. The amusement faded, and he was aware of a great
loneliness. This sister of his and the Morse drawing-room were
milestones of the road he had travelled. And he had left them behind.
He glanced affectionately about him at his few books. They were all the
comrades left to him.

“Hello, what’s that?” he demanded in startled surprise.

Marian repeated her question.

“Why don’t I go to work?” He broke into a laugh that was only
half-hearted. “That Hermann of yours has been talking to you.”

She shook her head.

“Don’t lie,” he commanded, and the nod of her head affirmed his charge.

“Well, you tell that Hermann of yours to mind his own business; that
when I write poetry about the girl he’s keeping company with it’s his
business, but that outside of that he’s got no say so. Understand?

“So you don’t think I’ll succeed as a writer, eh?” he went on. “You
think I’m no good?—that I’ve fallen down and am a disgrace to the
family?”

“I think it would be much better if you got a job,” she said firmly,
and he saw she was sincere. “Hermann says—”

“Damn Hermann!” he broke out good-naturedly. “What I want to know is
when you’re going to get married. Also, you find out from your Hermann
if he will deign to permit you to accept a wedding present from me.”

He mused over the incident after she had gone, and once or twice broke
out into laughter that was bitter as he saw his sister and her
betrothed, all the members of his own class and the members of Ruth’s
class, directing their narrow little lives by narrow little
formulas—herd-creatures, flocking together and patterning their lives
by one another’s opinions, failing of being individuals and of really
living life because of the childlike formulas by which they were
enslaved. He summoned them before him in apparitional procession:
Bernard Higginbotham arm in arm with Mr. Butler, Hermann von Schmidt
cheek by jowl with Charley Hapgood, and one by one and in pairs he
judged them and dismissed them—judged them by the standards of
intellect and morality he had learned from the books. Vainly he asked:
Where are the great souls, the great men and women? He found them not
among the careless, gross, and stupid intelligences that answered the
call of vision to his narrow room. He felt a loathing for them such as
Circe must have felt for her swine. When he had dismissed the last one
and thought himself alone, a late-comer entered, unexpected and
unsummoned. Martin watched him and saw the stiff-rim, the square-cut,
double-breasted coat and the swaggering shoulders, of the youthful
hoodlum who had once been he.

“You were like all the rest, young fellow,” Martin sneered. “Your
morality and your knowledge were just the same as theirs. You did not
think and act for yourself. Your opinions, like your clothes, were
ready made; your acts were shaped by popular approval. You were cock of
your gang because others acclaimed you the real thing. You fought and
ruled the gang, not because you liked to,—you know you really despised
it,—but because the other fellows patted you on the shoulder. You
licked Cheese-Face because you wouldn’t give in, and you wouldn’t give
in partly because you were an abysmal brute and for the rest because
you believed what every one about you believed, that the measure of
manhood was the carnivorous ferocity displayed in injuring and marring
fellow-creatures’ anatomies. Why, you whelp, you even won other
fellows’ girls away from them, not because you wanted the girls, but
because in the marrow of those about you, those who set your moral
pace, was the instinct of the wild stallion and the bull-seal. Well,
the years have passed, and what do you think about it now?”

As if in reply, the vision underwent a swift metamorphosis. The
stiff-rim and the square-cut vanished, being replaced by milder
garments; the toughness went out of the face, the hardness out of the
eyes; and, the face, chastened and refined, was irradiated from an
inner life of communion with beauty and knowledge. The apparition was
very like his present self, and, as he regarded it, he noted the
student-lamp by which it was illuminated, and the book over which it
pored. He glanced at the title and read, “The Science of Æsthetics.”
Next, he entered into the apparition, trimmed the student-lamp, and
himself went on reading “The Science of Æsthetics.”




CHAPTER XXX.


On a beautiful fall day, a day of similar Indian summer to that which
had seen their love declared the year before, Martin read his
“Love-cycle” to Ruth. It was in the afternoon, and, as before, they had
ridden out to their favorite knoll in the hills. Now and again she had
interrupted his reading with exclamations of pleasure, and now, as he
laid the last sheet of manuscript with its fellows, he waited her
judgment.

She delayed to speak, and at last she spoke haltingly, hesitating to
frame in words the harshness of her thought.

“I think they are beautiful, very beautiful,” she said; “but you can’t
sell them, can you? You see what I mean,” she said, almost pleaded.
“This writing of yours is not practical. Something is the matter—maybe
it is with the market—that prevents you from earning a living by it.
And please, dear, don’t misunderstand me. I am flattered, and made
proud, and all that—I could not be a true woman were it otherwise—that
you should write these poems to me. But they do not make our marriage
possible. Don’t you see, Martin? Don’t think me mercenary. It is love,
the thought of our future, with which I am burdened. A whole year has
gone by since we learned we loved each other, and our wedding day is no
nearer. Don’t think me immodest in thus talking about our wedding, for
really I have my heart, all that I am, at stake. Why don’t you try to
get work on a newspaper, if you are so bound up in your writing? Why
not become a reporter?—for a while, at least?”

“It would spoil my style,” was his answer, in a low, monotonous voice.
“You have no idea how I’ve worked for style.”

“But those storiettes,” she argued. “You called them hack-work. You
wrote many of them. Didn’t they spoil your style?”

“No, the cases are different. The storiettes were ground out, jaded, at
the end of a long day of application to style. But a reporter’s work is
all hack from morning till night, is the one paramount thing of life.
And it is a whirlwind life, the life of the moment, with neither past
nor future, and certainly without thought of any style but reportorial
style, and that certainly is not literature. To become a reporter now,
just as my style is taking form, crystallizing, would be to commit
literary suicide. As it is, every storiette, every word of every
storiette, was a violation of myself, of my self-respect, of my respect
for beauty. I tell you it was sickening. I was guilty of sin. And I was
secretly glad when the markets failed, even if my clothes did go into
pawn. But the joy of writing the ‘Love-cycle’! The creative joy in its
noblest form! That was compensation for everything.”

Martin did not know that Ruth was unsympathetic concerning the creative
joy. She used the phrase—it was on her lips he had first heard it. She
had read about it, studied about it, in the university in the course of
earning her Bachelorship of Arts; but she was not original, not
creative, and all manifestations of culture on her part were but
harpings of the harpings of others.

“May not the editor have been right in his revision of your ‘Sea
Lyrics’?” she questioned. “Remember, an editor must have proved
qualifications or else he would not be an editor.”

“That’s in line with the persistence of the established,” he rejoined,
his heat against the editor-folk getting the better of him. “What is,
is not only right, but is the best possible. The existence of anything
is sufficient vindication of its fitness to exist—to exist, mark you,
as the average person unconsciously believes, not merely in present
conditions, but in all conditions. It is their ignorance, of course,
that makes them believe such rot—their ignorance, which is nothing more
nor less than the henidical mental process described by Weininger. They
think they think, and such thinkless creatures are the arbiters of the
lives of the few who really think.”

He paused, overcome by the consciousness that he had been talking over
Ruth’s head.

“I’m sure I don’t know who this Weininger is,” she retorted. “And you
are so dreadfully general that I fail to follow you. What I was
speaking of was the qualification of editors—”

“And I’ll tell you,” he interrupted. “The chief qualification of
ninety-nine per cent of all editors is failure. They have failed as
writers. Don’t think they prefer the drudgery of the desk and the
slavery to their circulation and to the business manager to the joy of
writing. They have tried to write, and they have failed. And right
there is the cursed paradox of it. Every portal to success in
literature is guarded by those watch-dogs, the failures in literature.
The editors, sub-editors, associate editors, most of them, and the
manuscript-readers for the magazines and book-publishers, most of them,
nearly all of them, are men who wanted to write and who have failed.
And yet they, of all creatures under the sun the most unfit, are the
very creatures who decide what shall and what shall not find its way
into print—they, who have proved themselves not original, who have
demonstrated that they lack the divine fire, sit in judgment upon
originality and genius. And after them come the reviewers, just so many
more failures. Don’t tell me that they have not dreamed the dream and
attempted to write poetry or fiction; for they have, and they have
failed. Why, the average review is more nauseating than cod-liver oil.
But you know my opinion on the reviewers and the alleged critics. There
are great critics, but they are as rare as comets. If I fail as a
writer, I shall have proved for the career of editorship. There’s bread
and butter and jam, at any rate.”

Ruth’s mind was quick, and her disapproval of her lover’s views was
buttressed by the contradiction she found in his contention.

“But, Martin, if that be so, if all the doors are closed as you have
shown so conclusively, how is it possible that any of the great writers
ever arrived?”

“They arrived by achieving the impossible,” he answered. “They did such
blazing, glorious work as to burn to ashes those that opposed them.
They arrived by course of miracle, by winning a thousand-to-one wager
against them. They arrived because they were Carlyle’s battle-scarred
giants who will not be kept down. And that is what I must do; I must
achieve the impossible.”

“But if you fail? You must consider me as well, Martin.”

“If I fail?” He regarded her for a moment as though the thought she had
uttered was unthinkable. Then intelligence illumined his eyes. “If I
fail, I shall become an editor, and you will be an editor’s wife.”

She frowned at his facetiousness—a pretty, adorable frown that made him
put his arm around her and kiss it away.

“There, that’s enough,” she urged, by an effort of will withdrawing
herself from the fascination of his strength. “I have talked with
father and mother. I never before asserted myself so against them. I
demanded to be heard. I was very undutiful. They are against you, you
know; but I assured them over and over of my abiding love for you, and
at last father agreed that if you wanted to, you could begin right away
in his office. And then, of his own accord, he said he would pay you
enough at the start so that we could get married and have a little
cottage somewhere. Which I think was very fine of him—don’t you?”

Martin, with the dull pain of despair at his heart, mechanically
reaching for the tobacco and paper (which he no longer carried) to roll
a cigarette, muttered something inarticulate, and Ruth went on.

“Frankly, though, and don’t let it hurt you—I tell you, to show you
precisely how you stand with him—he doesn’t like your radical views,
and he thinks you are lazy. Of course I know you are not. I know you
work hard.”

How hard, even she did not know, was the thought in Martin’s mind.

“Well, then,” he said, “how about my views? Do you think they are so
radical?”

He held her eyes and waited the answer.

“I think them, well, very disconcerting,” she replied.

The question was answered for him, and so oppressed was he by the
grayness of life that he forgot the tentative proposition she had made
for him to go to work. And she, having gone as far as she dared, was
willing to wait the answer till she should bring the question up again.

She had not long to wait. Martin had a question of his own to propound
to her. He wanted to ascertain the measure of her faith in him, and
within the week each was answered. Martin precipitated it by reading to
her his “The Shame of the Sun.”

“Why don’t you become a reporter?” she asked when he had finished. “You
love writing so, and I am sure you would succeed. You could rise in
journalism and make a name for yourself. There are a number of great
special correspondents. Their salaries are large, and their field is
the world. They are sent everywhere, to the heart of Africa, like
Stanley, or to interview the Pope, or to explore unknown Thibet.”

“Then you don’t like my essay?” he rejoined. “You believe that I have
some show in journalism but none in literature?”

“No, no; I do like it. It reads well. But I am afraid it’s over the
heads of your readers. At least it is over mine. It sounds beautiful,
but I don’t understand it. Your scientific slang is beyond me. You are
an extremist, you know, dear, and what may be intelligible to you may
not be intelligible to the rest of us.”

“I imagine it’s the philosophic slang that bothers you,” was all he
could say.

He was flaming from the fresh reading of the ripest thought he had
expressed, and her verdict stunned him.

“No matter how poorly it is done,” he persisted, “don’t you see
anything in it?—in the thought of it, I mean?”

She shook her head.

“No, it is so different from anything I have read. I read Maeterlinck
and understand him—”

“His mysticism, you understand that?” Martin flashed out.

“Yes, but this of yours, which is supposed to be an attack upon him, I
don’t understand. Of course, if originality counts—”

He stopped her with an impatient gesture that was not followed by
speech. He became suddenly aware that she was speaking and that she had
been speaking for some time.

“After all, your writing has been a toy to you,” she was saying.
“Surely you have played with it long enough. It is time to take up life
seriously—_our_ life, Martin. Hitherto you have lived solely your own.”

“You want me to go to work?” he asked.

“Yes. Father has offered—”

“I understand all that,” he broke in; “but what I want to know is
whether or not you have lost faith in me?”

She pressed his hand mutely, her eyes dim.

“In your writing, dear,” she admitted in a half-whisper.

“You’ve read lots of my stuff,” he went on brutally. “What do you think
of it? Is it utterly hopeless? How does it compare with other men’s
work?”

“But they sell theirs, and you—don’t.”

“That doesn’t answer my question. Do you think that literature is not
at all my vocation?”

“Then I will answer.” She steeled herself to do it. “I don’t think you
were made to write. Forgive me, dear. You compel me to say it; and you
know I know more about literature than you do.”

“Yes, you are a Bachelor of Arts,” he said meditatively; “and you ought
to know.”

“But there is more to be said,” he continued, after a pause painful to
both. “I know what I have in me. No one knows that so well as I. I know
I shall succeed. I will not be kept down. I am afire with what I have
to say in verse, and fiction, and essay. I do not ask you to have faith
in that, though. I do not ask you to have faith in me, nor in my
writing. What I do ask of you is to love me and have faith in love.

“A year ago I begged for two years. One of those years is yet to run.
And I do believe, upon my honor and my soul, that before that year is
run I shall have succeeded. You remember what you told me long ago,
that I must serve my apprenticeship to writing. Well, I have served it.
I have crammed it and telescoped it. With you at the end awaiting me, I
have never shirked. Do you know, I have forgotten what it is to fall
peacefully asleep. A few million years ago I knew what it was to sleep
my fill and to awake naturally from very glut of sleep. I am awakened
always now by an alarm clock. If I fall asleep early or late, I set the
alarm accordingly; and this, and the putting out of the lamp, are my
last conscious actions.

“When I begin to feel drowsy, I change the heavy book I am reading for
a lighter one. And when I doze over that, I beat my head with my
knuckles in order to drive sleep away. Somewhere I read of a man who
was afraid to sleep. Kipling wrote the story. This man arranged a spur
so that when unconsciousness came, his naked body pressed against the
iron teeth. Well, I’ve done the same. I look at the time, and I resolve
that not until midnight, or not until one o’clock, or two o’clock, or
three o’clock, shall the spur be removed. And so it rowels me awake
until the appointed time. That spur has been my bed-mate for months. I
have grown so desperate that five and a half hours of sleep is an
extravagance. I sleep four hours now. I am starved for sleep. There are
times when I am light-headed from want of sleep, times when death, with
its rest and sleep, is a positive lure to me, times when I am haunted
by Longfellow’s lines:

“‘The sea is still and deep;
All things within its bosom sleep;
A single step and all is o’er,
A plunge, a bubble, and no more.’


“Of course, this is sheer nonsense. It comes from nervousness, from an
overwrought mind. But the point is: Why have I done this? For you. To
shorten my apprenticeship. To compel Success to hasten. And my
apprenticeship is now served. I know my equipment. I swear that I learn
more each month than the average college man learns in a year. I know
it, I tell you. But were my need for you to understand not so desperate
I should not tell you. It is not boasting. I measure the results by the
books. Your brothers, to-day, are ignorant barbarians compared with me
and the knowledge I have wrung from the books in the hours they were
sleeping. Long ago I wanted to be famous. I care very little for fame
now. What I want is you; I am more hungry for you than for food, or
clothing, or recognition. I have a dream of laying my head on your
breast and sleeping an aeon or so, and the dream will come true ere
another year is gone.”

His power beat against her, wave upon wave; and in the moment his will
opposed hers most she felt herself most strongly drawn toward him. The
strength that had always poured out from him to her was now flowering
in his impassioned voice, his flashing eyes, and the vigor of life and
intellect surging in him. And in that moment, and for the moment, she
was aware of a rift that showed in her certitude—a rift through which
she caught sight of the real Martin Eden, splendid and invincible; and
as animal-trainers have their moments of doubt, so she, for the
instant, seemed to doubt her power to tame this wild spirit of a man.

“And another thing,” he swept on. “You love me. But why do you love me?
The thing in me that compels me to write is the very thing that draws
your love. You love me because I am somehow different from the men you
have known and might have loved. I was not made for the desk and
counting-house, for petty business squabbling, and legal jangling. Make
me do such things, make me like those other men, doing the work they
do, breathing the air they breathe, developing the point of view they
have developed, and you have destroyed the difference, destroyed me,
destroyed the thing you love. My desire to write is the most vital
thing in me. Had I been a mere clod, neither would I have desired to
write, nor would you have desired me for a husband.”

“But you forget,” she interrupted, the quick surface of her mind
glimpsing a parallel. “There have been eccentric inventors, starving
their families while they sought such chimeras as perpetual motion.
Doubtless their wives loved them, and suffered with them and for them,
not because of but in spite of their infatuation for perpetual motion.”

“True,” was the reply. “But there have been inventors who were not
eccentric and who starved while they sought to invent practical things;
and sometimes, it is recorded, they succeeded. Certainly I do not seek
any impossibilities—”

“You have called it ‘achieving the impossible,’” she interpolated.

“I spoke figuratively. I seek to do what men have done before me—to
write and to live by my writing.”

Her silence spurred him on.

“To you, then, my goal is as much a chimera as perpetual motion?” he
demanded.

He read her answer in the pressure of her hand on his—the pitying
mother-hand for the hurt child. And to her, just then, he was the hurt
child, the infatuated man striving to achieve the impossible.

Toward the close of their talk she warned him again of the antagonism
of her father and mother.

“But you love me?” he asked.

“I do! I do!” she cried.

“And I love you, not them, and nothing they do can hurt me.” Triumph
sounded in his voice. “For I have faith in your love, not fear of their
enmity. All things may go astray in this world, but not love. Love
cannot go wrong unless it be a weakling that faints and stumbles by the
way.”




CHAPTER XXXI.


Martin had encountered his sister Gertrude by chance on Broadway—as it
proved, a most propitious yet disconcerting chance. Waiting on the
corner for a car, she had seen him first, and noted the eager, hungry
lines of his face and the desperate, worried look of his eyes. In
truth, he was desperate and worried. He had just come from a fruitless
interview with the pawnbroker, from whom he had tried to wring an
additional loan on his wheel. The muddy fall weather having come on,
Martin had pledged his wheel some time since and retained his black
suit.

“There’s the black suit,” the pawnbroker, who knew his every asset, had
answered. “You needn’t tell me you’ve gone and pledged it with that
Jew, Lipka. Because if you have—”

The man had looked the threat, and Martin hastened to cry:-

“No, no; I’ve got it. But I want to wear it on a matter of business.”

“All right,” the mollified usurer had replied. “And I want it on a
matter of business before I can let you have any more money. You don’t
think I’m in it for my health?”

“But it’s a forty-dollar wheel, in good condition,” Martin had argued.
“And you’ve only let me have seven dollars on it. No, not even seven.
Six and a quarter; you took the interest in advance.”

“If you want some more, bring the suit,” had been the reply that sent
Martin out of the stuffy little den, so desperate at heart as to
reflect it in his face and touch his sister to pity.

Scarcely had they met when the Telegraph Avenue car came along and
stopped to take on a crowd of afternoon shoppers. Mrs. Higginbotham
divined from the grip on her arm as he helped her on, that he was not
going to follow her. She turned on the step and looked down upon him.
His haggard face smote her to the heart again.

“Ain’t you comin’?” she asked

The next moment she had descended to his side.

“I’m walking—exercise, you know,” he explained.

“Then I’ll go along for a few blocks,” she announced. “Mebbe it’ll do
me good. I ain’t ben feelin’ any too spry these last few days.”

Martin glanced at her and verified her statement in her general
slovenly appearance, in the unhealthy fat, in the drooping shoulders,
the tired face with the sagging lines, and in the heavy fall of her
feet, without elasticity—a very caricature of the walk that belongs to
a free and happy body.

“You’d better stop here,” he said, though she had already come to a
halt at the first corner, “and take the next car.”

“My goodness!—if I ain’t all tired a’ready!” she panted. “But I’m just
as able to walk as you in them soles. They’re that thin they’ll bu’st
long before you git out to North Oakland.”

“I’ve a better pair at home,” was the answer.

“Come out to dinner to-morrow,” she invited irrelevantly. “Mr.
Higginbotham won’t be there. He’s goin’ to San Leandro on business.”

Martin shook his head, but he had failed to keep back the wolfish,
hungry look that leapt into his eyes at the suggestion of dinner.

“You haven’t a penny, Mart, and that’s why you’re walkin’. Exercise!”
She tried to sniff contemptuously, but succeeded in producing only a
sniffle. “Here, lemme see.”

And, fumbling in her satchel, she pressed a five-dollar piece into his
hand. “I guess I forgot your last birthday, Mart,” she mumbled lamely.

Martin’s hand instinctively closed on the piece of gold. In the same
instant he knew he ought not to accept, and found himself struggling in
the throes of indecision. That bit of gold meant food, life, and light
in his body and brain, power to go on writing, and—who was to
say?—maybe to write something that would bring in many pieces of gold.
Clear on his vision burned the manuscripts of two essays he had just
completed. He saw them under the table on top of the heap of returned
manuscripts for which he had no stamps, and he saw their titles, just
as he had typed them—“The High Priests of Mystery,” and “The Cradle of
Beauty.” He had never submitted them anywhere. They were as good as
anything he had done in that line. If only he had stamps for them! Then
the certitude of his ultimate success rose up in him, an able ally of
hunger, and with a quick movement he slipped the coin into his pocket.

“I’ll pay you back, Gertrude, a hundred times over,” he gulped out, his
throat painfully contracted and in his eyes a swift hint of moisture.

“Mark my words!” he cried with abrupt positiveness. “Before the year is
out I’ll put an even hundred of those little yellow-boys into your
hand. I don’t ask you to believe me. All you have to do is wait and
see.”

Nor did she believe. Her incredulity made her uncomfortable, and
failing of other expedient, she said:-

“I know you’re hungry, Mart. It’s sticking out all over you. Come in to
meals any time. I’ll send one of the children to tell you when Mr.
Higginbotham ain’t to be there. An’ Mart—”

He waited, though he knew in his secret heart what she was about to
say, so visible was her thought process to him.

“Don’t you think it’s about time you got a job?”

“You don’t think I’ll win out?” he asked.

She shook her head.

“Nobody has faith in me, Gertrude, except myself.” His voice was
passionately rebellious. “I’ve done good work already, plenty of it,
and sooner or later it will sell.”

“How do you know it is good?”

“Because—” He faltered as the whole vast field of literature and the
history of literature stirred in his brain and pointed the futility of
his attempting to convey to her the reasons for his faith. “Well,
because it’s better than ninety-nine per cent of what is published in
the magazines.”

“I wish’t you’d listen to reason,” she answered feebly, but with
unwavering belief in the correctness of her diagnosis of what was
ailing him. “I wish’t you’d listen to reason,” she repeated, “an’ come
to dinner to-morrow.”

After Martin had helped her on the car, he hurried to the post-office
and invested three of the five dollars in stamps; and when, later in
the day, on the way to the Morse home, he stopped in at the post-office
to weigh a large number of long, bulky envelopes, he affixed to them
all the stamps save three of the two-cent denomination.

It proved a momentous night for Martin, for after dinner he met Russ
Brissenden. How he chanced to come there, whose friend he was or what
acquaintance brought him, Martin did not know. Nor had he the curiosity
to inquire about him of Ruth. In short, Brissenden struck Martin as
anaemic and feather-brained, and was promptly dismissed from his mind.
An hour later he decided that Brissenden was a boor as well, what of
the way he prowled about from one room to another, staring at the
pictures or poking his nose into books and magazines he picked up from
the table or drew from the shelves. Though a stranger in the house he
finally isolated himself in the midst of the company, huddling into a
capacious Morris chair and reading steadily from a thin volume he had
drawn from his pocket. As he read, he abstractedly ran his fingers,
with a caressing movement, through his hair. Martin noticed him no more
that evening, except once when he observed him chaffing with great
apparent success with several of the young women.

It chanced that when Martin was leaving, he overtook Brissenden already
half down the walk to the street.

“Hello, is that you?” Martin said.

The other replied with an ungracious grunt, but swung alongside. Martin
made no further attempt at conversation, and for several blocks
unbroken silence lay upon them.

“Pompous old ass!”

The suddenness and the virulence of the exclamation startled Martin. He
felt amused, and at the same time was aware of a growing dislike for
the other.

“What do you go to such a place for?” was abruptly flung at him after
another block of silence.

“Why do you?” Martin countered.

“Bless me, I don’t know,” came back. “At least this is my first
indiscretion. There are twenty-four hours in each day, and I must spend
them somehow. Come and have a drink.”

“All right,” Martin answered.

The next moment he was nonplussed by the readiness of his acceptance.
At home was several hours’ hack-work waiting for him before he went to
bed, and after he went to bed there was a volume of Weismann waiting
for him, to say nothing of Herbert Spencer’s Autobiography, which was
as replete for him with romance as any thrilling novel. Why should he
waste any time with this man he did not like? was his thought. And yet,
it was not so much the man nor the drink as was it what was associated
with the drink—the bright lights, the mirrors and dazzling array of
glasses, the warm and glowing faces and the resonant hum of the voices
of men. That was it, it was the voices of men, optimistic men, men who
breathed success and spent their money for drinks like men. He was
lonely, that was what was the matter with him; that was why he had
snapped at the invitation as a bonita strikes at a white rag on a hook.
Not since with Joe, at Shelly Hot Springs, with the one exception of
the wine he took with the Portuguese grocer, had Martin had a drink at
a public bar. Mental exhaustion did not produce a craving for liquor
such as physical exhaustion did, and he had felt no need for it. But
just now he felt desire for the drink, or, rather, for the atmosphere
wherein drinks were dispensed and disposed of. Such a place was the
Grotto, where Brissenden and he lounged in capacious leather chairs and
drank Scotch and soda.

They talked. They talked about many things, and now Brissenden and now
Martin took turn in ordering Scotch and soda. Martin, who was extremely
strong-headed, marvelled at the other’s capacity for liquor, and ever
and anon broke off to marvel at the other’s conversation. He was not
long in assuming that Brissenden knew everything, and in deciding that
here was the second intellectual man he had met. But he noted that
Brissenden had what Professor Caldwell lacked—namely, fire, the
flashing insight and perception, the flaming uncontrol of genius.
Living language flowed from him. His thin lips, like the dies of a
machine, stamped out phrases that cut and stung; or again, pursing
caressingly about the inchoate sound they articulated, the thin lips
shaped soft and velvety things, mellow phrases of glow and glory, of
haunting beauty, reverberant of the mystery and inscrutableness of
life; and yet again the thin lips were like a bugle, from which rang
the crash and tumult of cosmic strife, phrases that sounded clear as
silver, that were luminous as starry spaces, that epitomized the final
word of science and yet said something more—the poet’s word, the
transcendental truth, elusive and without words which could express,
and which none the less found expression in the subtle and all but
ungraspable connotations of common words. He, by some wonder of vision,
saw beyond the farthest outpost of empiricism, where was no language
for narration, and yet, by some golden miracle of speech, investing
known words with unknown significances, he conveyed to Martin’s
consciousness messages that were incommunicable to ordinary souls.

Martin forgot his first impression of dislike. Here was the best the
books had to offer coming true. Here was an intelligence, a living man
for him to look up to. “I am down in the dirt at your feet,” Martin
repeated to himself again and again.

“You’ve studied biology,” he said aloud, in significant allusion.

To his surprise Brissenden shook his head.

“But you are stating truths that are substantiated only by biology,”
Martin insisted, and was rewarded by a blank stare. “Your conclusions
are in line with the books which you must have read.”

“I am glad to hear it,” was the answer. “That my smattering of
knowledge should enable me to short-cut my way to truth is most
reassuring. As for myself, I never bother to find out if I am right or
not. It is all valueless anyway. Man can never know the ultimate
verities.”

“You are a disciple of Spencer!” Martin cried triumphantly.

“I haven’t read him since adolescence, and all I read then was his
‘Education.’”

“I wish I could gather knowledge as carelessly,” Martin broke out half
an hour later. He had been closely analyzing Brissenden’s mental
equipment. “You are a sheer dogmatist, and that’s what makes it so
marvellous. You state dogmatically the latest facts which science has
been able to establish only by _à posteriori_ reasoning. You jump at
correct conclusions. You certainly short-cut with a vengeance. You feel
your way with the speed of light, by some hyperrational process, to
truth.”

“Yes, that was what used to bother Father Joseph, and Brother Dutton,”
Brissenden replied. “Oh, no,” he added; “I am not anything. It was a
lucky trick of fate that sent me to a Catholic college for my
education. Where did you pick up what you know?”

And while Martin told him, he was busy studying Brissenden, ranging
from a long, lean, aristocratic face and drooping shoulders to the
overcoat on a neighboring chair, its pockets sagged and bulged by the
freightage of many books. Brissenden’s face and long, slender hands
were browned by the sun—excessively browned, Martin thought. This
sunburn bothered Martin. It was patent that Brissenden was no outdoor
man. Then how had he been ravaged by the sun? Something morbid and
significant attached to that sunburn, was Martin’s thought as he
returned to a study of the face, narrow, with high cheek-bones and
cavernous hollows, and graced with as delicate and fine an aquiline
nose as Martin had ever seen. There was nothing remarkable about the
size of the eyes. They were neither large nor small, while their color
was a nondescript brown; but in them smouldered a fire, or, rather,
lurked an expression dual and strangely contradictory. Defiant,
indomitable, even harsh to excess, they at the same time aroused pity.
Martin found himself pitying him he knew not why, though he was soon to
learn.

“Oh, I’m a lunger,” Brissenden announced, offhand, a little later,
having already stated that he came from Arizona. “I’ve been down there
a couple of years living on the climate.”

“Aren’t you afraid to venture it up in this climate?”

“Afraid?”

There was no special emphasis of his repetition of Martin’s word. But
Martin saw in that ascetic face the advertisement that there was
nothing of which it was afraid. The eyes had narrowed till they were
eagle-like, and Martin almost caught his breath as he noted the eagle
beak with its dilated nostrils, defiant, assertive, aggressive.
Magnificent, was what he commented to himself, his blood thrilling at
the sight. Aloud, he quoted:-

“‘Under the bludgeoning of Chance
    My head is bloody but unbowed.’”


“You like Henley,” Brissenden said, his expression changing swiftly to
large graciousness and tenderness. “Of course, I couldn’t have expected
anything else of you. Ah, Henley! A brave soul. He stands out among
contemporary rhymesters—magazine rhymesters—as a gladiator stands out
in the midst of a band of eunuchs.”

“You don’t like the magazines,” Martin softly impeached.

“Do you?” was snarled back at him so savagely as to startle him.

“I—I write, or, rather, try to write, for the magazines,” Martin
faltered.

“That’s better,” was the mollified rejoinder. “You try to write, but
you don’t succeed. I respect and admire your failure. I know what you
write. I can see it with half an eye, and there’s one ingredient in it
that shuts it out of the magazines. It’s guts, and magazines have no
use for that particular commodity. What they want is wish-wash and
slush, and God knows they get it, but not from you.”

“I’m not above hack-work,” Martin contended.

“On the contrary—” Brissenden paused and ran an insolent eye over
Martin’s objective poverty, passing from the well-worn tie and the
saw-edged collar to the shiny sleeves of the coat and on to the slight
fray of one cuff, winding up and dwelling upon Martin’s sunken cheeks.
“On the contrary, hack-work is above you, so far above you that you can
never hope to rise to it. Why, man, I could insult you by asking you to
have something to eat.”

Martin felt the heat in his face of the involuntary blood, and
Brissenden laughed triumphantly.

“A full man is not insulted by such an invitation,” he concluded.

“You are a devil,” Martin cried irritably.

“Anyway, I didn’t ask you.”

“You didn’t dare.”

“Oh, I don’t know about that. I invite you now.”

Brissenden half rose from his chair as he spoke, as if with the
intention of departing to the restaurant forthwith.

Martin’s fists were tight-clenched, and his blood was drumming in his
temples.

“Bosco! He eats ’em alive! Eats ’em alive!” Brissenden exclaimed,
imitating the _spieler_ of a locally famous snake-eater.

“I could certainly eat you alive,” Martin said, in turn running
insolent eyes over the other’s disease-ravaged frame.

“Only I’m not worthy of it?”

“On the contrary,” Martin considered, “because the incident is not
worthy.” He broke into a laugh, hearty and wholesome. “I confess you
made a fool of me, Brissenden. That I am hungry and you are aware of it
are only ordinary phenomena, and there’s no disgrace. You see, I laugh
at the conventional little moralities of the herd; then you drift by,
say a sharp, true word, and immediately I am the slave of the same
little moralities.”

“You were insulted,” Brissenden affirmed.

“I certainly was, a moment ago. The prejudice of early youth, you know.
I learned such things then, and they cheapen what I have since learned.
They are the skeletons in my particular closet.”

“But you’ve got the door shut on them now?”

“I certainly have.”

“Sure?”

“Sure.”

“Then let’s go and get something to eat.”

“I’ll go you,” Martin answered, attempting to pay for the current
Scotch and soda with the last change from his two dollars and seeing
the waiter bullied by Brissenden into putting that change back on the
table.

Martin pocketed it with a grimace, and felt for a moment the kindly
weight of Brissenden’s hand upon his shoulder.




CHAPTER XXXII.


Promptly, the next afternoon, Maria was excited by Martin’s second
visitor. But she did not lose her head this time, for she seated
Brissenden in her parlor’s grandeur of respectability.

“Hope you don’t mind my coming?” Brissenden began.

“No, no, not at all,” Martin answered, shaking hands and waving him to
the solitary chair, himself taking to the bed. “But how did you know
where I lived?”

“Called up the Morses. Miss Morse answered the ’phone. And here I am.”
He tugged at his coat pocket and flung a thin volume on the table.
“There’s a book, by a poet. Read it and keep it.” And then, in reply to
Martin’s protest: “What have I to do with books? I had another
hemorrhage this morning. Got any whiskey? No, of course not. Wait a
minute.”

He was off and away. Martin watched his long figure go down the outside
steps, and, on turning to close the gate, noted with a pang the
shoulders, which had once been broad, drawn in now over the collapsed
ruin of the chest. Martin got two tumblers, and fell to reading the
book of verse, Henry Vaughn Marlow’s latest collection.

“No Scotch,” Brissenden announced on his return. “The beggar sells
nothing but American whiskey. But here’s a quart of it.”

“I’ll send one of the youngsters for lemons, and we’ll make a toddy,”
Martin offered.

“I wonder what a book like that will earn Marlow?” he went on, holding
up the volume in question.

“Possibly fifty dollars,” came the answer. “Though he’s lucky if he
pulls even on it, or if he can inveigle a publisher to risk bringing it
out.”

“Then one can’t make a living out of poetry?”

Martin’s tone and face alike showed his dejection.

“Certainly not. What fool expects to? Out of rhyming, yes. There’s
Bruce, and Virginia Spring, and Sedgwick. They do very nicely. But
poetry—do you know how Vaughn Marlow makes his living?—teaching in a
boys’ cramming-joint down in Pennsylvania, and of all private little
hells such a billet is the limit. I wouldn’t trade places with him if
he had fifty years of life before him. And yet his work stands out from
the ruck of the contemporary versifiers as a balas ruby among carrots.
And the reviews he gets! Damn them, all of them, the crass manikins!”

“Too much is written by the men who can’t write about the men who do
write,” Martin concurred. “Why, I was appalled at the quantities of
rubbish written about Stevenson and his work.”

“Ghouls and harpies!” Brissenden snapped out with clicking teeth. “Yes,
I know the spawn—complacently pecking at him for his Father Damien
letter, analyzing him, weighing him—”

“Measuring him by the yardstick of their own miserable egos,” Martin
broke in.

“Yes, that’s it, a good phrase,—mouthing and besliming the True, and
Beautiful, and Good, and finally patting him on the back and saying,
‘Good dog, Fido.’ Faugh! ‘The little chattering daws of men,’ Richard
Realf called them the night he died.”

“Pecking at star-dust,” Martin took up the strain warmly; “at the
meteoric flight of the master-men. I once wrote a squib on them—the
critics, or the reviewers, rather.”

“Let’s see it,” Brissenden begged eagerly.

So Martin unearthed a carbon copy of “Star-dust,” and during the
reading of it Brissenden chuckled, rubbed his hands, and forgot to sip
his toddy.

“Strikes me you’re a bit of star-dust yourself, flung into a world of
cowled gnomes who cannot see,” was his comment at the end of it. “Of
course it was snapped up by the first magazine?”

Martin ran over the pages of his manuscript book. “It has been refused
by twenty-seven of them.”

Brissenden essayed a long and hearty laugh, but broke down in a fit of
coughing.

“Say, you needn’t tell me you haven’t tackled poetry,” he gasped. “Let
me see some of it.”

“Don’t read it now,” Martin pleaded. “I want to talk with you. I’ll
make up a bundle and you can take it home.”

Brissenden departed with the “Love-cycle,” and “The Peri and the
Pearl,” returning next day to greet Martin with:-

“I want more.”

Not only did he assure Martin that he was a poet, but Martin learned
that Brissenden also was one. He was swept off his feet by the other’s
work, and astounded that no attempt had been made to publish it.

“A plague on all their houses!” was Brissenden’s answer to Martin’s
volunteering to market his work for him. “Love Beauty for its own
sake,” was his counsel, “and leave the magazines alone. Back to your
ships and your sea—that’s my advice to you, Martin Eden. What do you
want in these sick and rotten cities of men? You are cutting your
throat every day you waste in them trying to prostitute beauty to the
needs of magazinedom. What was it you quoted me the other day?—Oh, yes,
‘Man, the latest of the ephemera.’ Well, what do you, the latest of the
ephemera, want with fame? If you got it, it would be poison to you. You
are too simple, too elemental, and too rational, by my faith, to
prosper on such pap. I hope you never do sell a line to the magazines.
Beauty is the only master to serve. Serve her and damn the multitude!
Success! What in hell’s success if it isn’t right there in your
Stevenson sonnet, which outranks Henley’s ‘Apparition,’ in that
‘Love-cycle,’ in those sea-poems?

“It is not in what you succeed in doing that you get your joy, but in
the doing of it. You can’t tell me. I know it. You know it. Beauty
hurts you. It is an everlasting pain in you, a wound that does not
heal, a knife of flame. Why should you palter with magazines? Let
beauty be your end. Why should you mint beauty into gold? Anyway, you
can’t; so there’s no use in my getting excited over it. You can read
the magazines for a thousand years and you won’t find the value of one
line of Keats. Leave fame and coin alone, sign away on a ship
to-morrow, and go back to your sea.”

“Not for fame, but for love,” Martin laughed. “Love seems to have no
place in your Cosmos; in mine, Beauty is the handmaiden of Love.”

Brissenden looked at him pityingly and admiringly. “You are so young,
Martin boy, so young. You will flutter high, but your wings are of the
finest gauze, dusted with the fairest pigments. Do not scorch them. But
of course you have scorched them already. It required some glorified
petticoat to account for that ‘Love-cycle,’ and that’s the shame of
it.”

“It glorifies love as well as the petticoat,” Martin laughed.

“The philosophy of madness,” was the retort. “So have I assured myself
when wandering in hasheesh dreams. But beware. These bourgeois cities
will kill you. Look at that den of traitors where I met you. Dry rot is
no name for it. One can’t keep his sanity in such an atmosphere. It’s
degrading. There’s not one of them who is not degrading, man and woman,
all of them animated stomachs guided by the high intellectual and
artistic impulses of clams—”

He broke off suddenly and regarded Martin. Then, with a flash of
divination, he saw the situation. The expression on his face turned to
wondering horror.

“And you wrote that tremendous ‘Love-cycle’ to her—that pale,
shrivelled, female thing!”

The next instant Martin’s right hand had shot to a throttling clutch on
his throat, and he was being shaken till his teeth rattled. But Martin,
looking into his eyes, saw no fear there,—naught but a curious and
mocking devil. Martin remembered himself, and flung Brissenden, by the
neck, sidelong upon the bed, at the same moment releasing his hold.

Brissenden panted and gasped painfully for a moment, then began to
chuckle.

“You had made me eternally your debtor had you shaken out the flame,”
he said.

“My nerves are on a hair-trigger these days,” Martin apologized. “Hope
I didn’t hurt you. Here, let me mix a fresh toddy.”

“Ah, you young Greek!” Brissenden went on. “I wonder if you take just
pride in that body of yours. You are devilish strong. You are a young
panther, a lion cub. Well, well, it is you who must pay for that
strength.”

“What do you mean?” Martin asked curiously, passing him a glass. “Here,
down this and be good.”

“Because—” Brissenden sipped his toddy and smiled appreciation of it.
“Because of the women. They will worry you until you die, as they have
already worried you, or else I was born yesterday. Now there’s no use
in your choking me; I’m going to have my say. This is undoubtedly your
calf love; but for Beauty’s sake show better taste next time. What
under heaven do you want with a daughter of the bourgeoisie? Leave them
alone. Pick out some great, wanton flame of a woman, who laughs at life
and jeers at death and loves one while she may. There are such women,
and they will love you just as readily as any pusillanimous product of
bourgeois sheltered life.”

“Pusillanimous?” Martin protested.

“Just so, pusillanimous; prattling out little moralities that have been
prattled into them, and afraid to live life. They will love you,
Martin, but they will love their little moralities more. What you want
is the magnificent abandon of life, the great free souls, the blazing
butterflies and not the little gray moths. Oh, you will grow tired of
them, too, of all the female things, if you are unlucky enough to live.
But you won’t live. You won’t go back to your ships and sea; therefore,
you’ll hang around these pest-holes of cities until your bones are
rotten, and then you’ll die.”

“You can lecture me, but you can’t make me talk back,” Martin said.
“After all, you have but the wisdom of your temperament, and the wisdom
of my temperament is just as unimpeachable as yours.”

They disagreed about love, and the magazines, and many things, but they
liked each other, and on Martin’s part it was no less than a profound
liking. Day after day they were together, if for no more than the hour
Brissenden spent in Martin’s stuffy room. Brissenden never arrived
without his quart of whiskey, and when they dined together down-town,
he drank Scotch and soda throughout the meal. He invariably paid the
way for both, and it was through him that Martin learned the
refinements of food, drank his first champagne, and made acquaintance
with Rhenish wines.

But Brissenden was always an enigma. With the face of an ascetic, he
was, in all the failing blood of him, a frank voluptuary. He was
unafraid to die, bitter and cynical of all the ways of living; and yet,
dying, he loved life, to the last atom of it. He was possessed by a
madness to live, to thrill, “to squirm my little space in the cosmic
dust whence I came,” as he phrased it once himself. He had tampered
with drugs and done many strange things in quest of new thrills, new
sensations. As he told Martin, he had once gone three days without
water, had done so voluntarily, in order to experience the exquisite
delight of such a thirst assuaged. Who or what he was, Martin never
learned. He was a man without a past, whose future was the imminent
grave and whose present was a bitter fever of living.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


Martin was steadily losing his battle. Economize as he would, the
earnings from hack-work did not balance expenses. Thanksgiving found
him with his black suit in pawn and unable to accept the Morses’
invitation to dinner. Ruth was not made happy by his reason for not
coming, and the corresponding effect on him was one of desperation. He
told her that he would come, after all; that he would go over to San
Francisco, to the _Transcontinental_ office, collect the five dollars
due him, and with it redeem his suit of clothes.

In the morning he borrowed ten cents from Maria. He would have borrowed
it, by preference, from Brissenden, but that erratic individual had
disappeared. Two weeks had passed since Martin had seen him, and he
vainly cudgelled his brains for some cause of offence. The ten cents
carried Martin across the ferry to San Francisco, and as he walked up
Market Street he speculated upon his predicament in case he failed to
collect the money. There would then be no way for him to return to
Oakland, and he knew no one in San Francisco from whom to borrow
another ten cents.

The door to the _Transcontinental_ office was ajar, and Martin, in the
act of opening it, was brought to a sudden pause by a loud voice from
within, which exclaimed:- “But that is not the question, Mr. Ford.”
(Ford, Martin knew, from his correspondence, to be the editor’s name.)
“The question is, are you prepared to pay?—cash, and cash down, I mean?
I am not interested in the prospects of the _Transcontinental_ and what
you expect to make it next year. What I want is to be paid for what I
do. And I tell you, right now, the Christmas _Transcontinental_ don’t
go to press till I have the money in my hand. Good day. When you get
the money, come and see me.”

The door jerked open, and the man flung past Martin, with an angry
countenance and went down the corridor, muttering curses and clenching
his fists. Martin decided not to enter immediately, and lingered in the
hallways for a quarter of an hour. Then he shoved the door open and
walked in. It was a new experience, the first time he had been inside
an editorial office. Cards evidently were not necessary in that office,
for the boy carried word to an inner room that there was a man who
wanted to see Mr. Ford. Returning, the boy beckoned him from halfway
across the room and led him to the private office, the editorial
sanctum. Martin’s first impression was of the disorder and cluttered
confusion of the room. Next he noticed a bewhiskered, youthful-looking
man, sitting at a roll-top desk, who regarded him curiously. Martin
marvelled at the calm repose of his face. It was evident that the
squabble with the printer had not affected his equanimity.

“I—I am Martin Eden,” Martin began the conversation. (“And I want my
five dollars,” was what he would have liked to say.)

But this was his first editor, and under the circumstances he did not
desire to scare him too abruptly. To his surprise, Mr. Ford leaped into
the air with a “You don’t say so!” and the next moment, with both
hands, was shaking Martin’s hand effusively.

“Can’t say how glad I am to see you, Mr. Eden. Often wondered what you
were like.”

Here he held Martin off at arm’s length and ran his beaming eyes over
Martin’s second-best suit, which was also his worst suit, and which was
ragged and past repair, though the trousers showed the careful crease
he had put in with Maria’s flat-irons.

“I confess, though, I conceived you to be a much older man than you
are. Your story, you know, showed such breadth, and vigor, such
maturity and depth of thought. A masterpiece, that story—I knew it when
I had read the first half-dozen lines. Let me tell you how I first read
it. But no; first let me introduce you to the staff.”

Still talking, Mr. Ford led him into the general office, where he
introduced him to the associate editor, Mr. White, a slender, frail
little man whose hand seemed strangely cold, as if he were suffering
from a chill, and whose whiskers were sparse and silky.

“And Mr. Ends, Mr. Eden. Mr. Ends is our business manager, you know.”

Martin found himself shaking hands with a cranky-eyed, bald-headed man,
whose face looked youthful enough from what little could be seen of it,
for most of it was covered by a snow-white beard, carefully trimmed—by
his wife, who did it on Sundays, at which times she also shaved the
back of his neck.

The three men surrounded Martin, all talking admiringly and at once,
until it seemed to him that they were talking against time for a wager.

“We often wondered why you didn’t call,” Mr. White was saying.

“I didn’t have the carfare, and I live across the Bay,” Martin answered
bluntly, with the idea of showing them his imperative need for the
money.

Surely, he thought to himself, my glad rags in themselves are eloquent
advertisement of my need. Time and again, whenever opportunity offered,
he hinted about the purpose of his business. But his admirers’ ears
were deaf. They sang his praises, told him what they had thought of his
story at first sight, what they subsequently thought, what their wives
and families thought; but not one hint did they breathe of intention to
pay him for it.

“Did I tell you how I first read your story?” Mr. Ford said. “Of course
I didn’t. I was coming west from New York, and when the train stopped
at Ogden, the train-boy on the new run brought aboard the current
number of the _Transcontinental_.”

My God! Martin thought; you can travel in a Pullman while I starve for
the paltry five dollars you owe me. A wave of anger rushed over him.
The wrong done him by the _Transcontinental_ loomed colossal, for
strong upon him were all the dreary months of vain yearning, of hunger
and privation, and his present hunger awoke and gnawed at him,
reminding him that he had eaten nothing since the day before, and
little enough then. For the moment he saw red. These creatures were not
even robbers. They were sneak-thieves. By lies and broken promises they
had tricked him out of his story. Well, he would show them. And a great
resolve surged into his will to the effect that he would not leave the
office until he got his money. He remembered, if he did not get it,
that there was no way for him to go back to Oakland. He controlled
himself with an effort, but not before the wolfish expression of his
face had awed and perturbed them.

They became more voluble than ever. Mr. Ford started anew to tell how
he had first read “The Ring of Bells,” and Mr. Ends at the same time
was striving to repeat his niece’s appreciation of “The Ring of Bells,”
said niece being a school-teacher in Alameda.

“I’ll tell you what I came for,” Martin said finally. “To be paid for
that story all of you like so well. Five dollars, I believe, is what
you promised me would be paid on publication.”

Mr. Ford, with an expression on his mobile features of mediate and
happy acquiescence, started to reach for his pocket, then turned
suddenly to Mr. Ends, and said that he had left his money home. That
Mr. Ends resented this, was patent; and Martin saw the twitch of his
arm as if to protect his trousers pocket. Martin knew that the money
was there.

“I am sorry,” said Mr. Ends, “but I paid the printer not an hour ago,
and he took my ready change. It was careless of me to be so short; but
the bill was not yet due, and the printer’s request, as a favor, to
make an immediate advance, was quite unexpected.”

Both men looked expectantly at Mr. White, but that gentleman laughed
and shrugged his shoulders. His conscience was clean at any rate. He
had come into the _Transcontinental_ to learn magazine-literature,
instead of which he had principally learned finance. The
_Transcontinental_ owed him four months’ salary, and he knew that the
printer must be appeased before the associate editor.

“It’s rather absurd, Mr. Eden, to have caught us in this shape,” Mr.
Ford preambled airily. “All carelessness, I assure you. But I’ll tell
you what we’ll do. We’ll mail you a check the first thing in the
morning. You have Mr. Eden’s address, haven’t you, Mr. Ends?”

Yes, Mr. Ends had the address, and the check would be mailed the first
thing in the morning. Martin’s knowledge of banks and checks was hazy,
but he could see no reason why they should not give him the check on
this day just as well as on the next.

“Then it is understood, Mr. Eden, that we’ll mail you the check
to-morrow?” Mr. Ford said.

“I need the money to-day,” Martin answered stolidly.

“The unfortunate circumstances—if you had chanced here any other day,”
Mr. Ford began suavely, only to be interrupted by Mr. Ends, whose
cranky eyes justified themselves in his shortness of temper.

“Mr. Ford has already explained the situation,” he said with asperity.
“And so have I. The check will be mailed—”

“I also have explained,” Martin broke in, “and I have explained that I
want the money to-day.”

He had felt his pulse quicken a trifle at the business manager’s
brusqueness, and upon him he kept an alert eye, for it was in that
gentleman’s trousers pocket that he divined the _Transcontinental’s_
ready cash was reposing.

“It is too bad—” Mr. Ford began.

But at that moment, with an impatient movement, Mr. Ends turned as if
about to leave the room. At the same instant Martin sprang for him,
clutching him by the throat with one hand in such fashion that Mr.
Ends’ snow-white beard, still maintaining its immaculate trimness,
pointed ceilingward at an angle of forty-five degrees. To the horror of
Mr. White and Mr. Ford, they saw their business manager shaken like an
Astrakhan rug.

“Dig up, you venerable discourager of rising young talent!” Martin
exhorted. “Dig up, or I’ll shake it out of you, even if it’s all in
nickels.” Then, to the two affrighted onlookers: “Keep away! If you
interfere, somebody’s liable to get hurt.”

Mr. Ends was choking, and it was not until the grip on his throat was
eased that he was able to signify his acquiescence in the digging-up
programme. All together, after repeated digs, its trousers pocket
yielded four dollars and fifteen cents.

“Inside out with it,” Martin commanded.

An additional ten cents fell out. Martin counted the result of his raid
a second time to make sure.

“You next!” he shouted at Mr. Ford. “I want seventy-five cents more.”

Mr. Ford did not wait, but ransacked his pockets, with the result of
sixty cents.

“Sure that is all?” Martin demanded menacingly, possessing himself of
it. “What have you got in your vest pockets?”

In token of his good faith, Mr. Ford turned two of his pockets inside
out. A strip of cardboard fell to the floor from one of them. He
recovered it and was in the act of returning it, when Martin cried:-

“What’s that?—A ferry ticket? Here, give it to me. It’s worth ten
cents. I’ll credit you with it. I’ve now got four dollars and
ninety-five cents, including the ticket. Five cents is still due me.”

He looked fiercely at Mr. White, and found that fragile creature in the
act of handing him a nickel.

“Thank you,” Martin said, addressing them collectively. “I wish you a
good day.”

“Robber!” Mr. Ends snarled after him.

“Sneak-thief!” Martin retorted, slamming the door as he passed out.

Martin was elated—so elated that when he recollected that _The Hornet_
owed him fifteen dollars for “The Peri and the Pearl,” he decided
forthwith to go and collect it. But _The Hornet_ was run by a set of
clean-shaven, strapping young men, frank buccaneers who robbed
everything and everybody, not excepting one another. After some
breakage of the office furniture, the editor (an ex-college athlete),
ably assisted by the business manager, an advertising agent, and the
porter, succeeded in removing Martin from the office and in
accelerating, by initial impulse, his descent of the first flight of
stairs.

“Come again, Mr. Eden; glad to see you any time,” they laughed down at
him from the landing above.

Martin grinned as he picked himself up.

“Phew!” he murmured back. “The _Transcontinental_ crowd were
nanny-goats, but you fellows are a lot of prize-fighters.”

More laughter greeted this.

“I must say, Mr. Eden,” the editor of _The Hornet_ called down, “that
for a poet you can go some yourself. Where did you learn that right
cross—if I may ask?”

“Where you learned that half-Nelson,” Martin answered. “Anyway, you’re
going to have a black eye.”

“I hope your neck doesn’t stiffen up,” the editor wished solicitously:
“What do you say we all go out and have a drink on it—not the neck, of
course, but the little rough-house?”

“I’ll go you if I lose,” Martin accepted.

And robbers and robbed drank together, amicably agreeing that the
battle was to the strong, and that the fifteen dollars for “The Peri
and the Pearl” belonged by right to _The Hornet’s_ editorial staff.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


Arthur remained at the gate while Ruth climbed Maria’s front steps. She
heard the rapid click of the type-writer, and when Martin let her in,
found him on the last page of a manuscript. She had come to make
certain whether or not he would be at their table for Thanksgiving
dinner; but before she could broach the subject Martin plunged into the
one with which he was full.

“Here, let me read you this,” he cried, separating the carbon copies
and running the pages of manuscript into shape. “It’s my latest, and
different from anything I’ve done. It is so altogether different that I
am almost afraid of it, and yet I’ve a sneaking idea it is good. You be
judge. It’s an Hawaiian story. I’ve called it ‘Wiki-wiki.’”

His face was bright with the creative glow, though she shivered in the
cold room and had been struck by the coldness of his hands at greeting.
She listened closely while he read, and though he from time to time had
seen only disapprobation in her face, at the close he asked:-

“Frankly, what do you think of it?”

“I—I don’t know,” she, answered. “Will it—do you think it will sell?”

“I’m afraid not,” was the confession. “It’s too strong for the
magazines. But it’s true, on my word it’s true.”

“But why do you persist in writing such things when you know they won’t
sell?” she went on inexorably. “The reason for your writing is to make
a living, isn’t it?”

“Yes, that’s right; but the miserable story got away with me. I
couldn’t help writing it. It demanded to be written.”

“But that character, that Wiki-Wiki, why do you make him talk so
roughly? Surely it will offend your readers, and surely that is why the
editors are justified in refusing your work.”

“Because the real Wiki-Wiki would have talked that way.”

“But it is not good taste.”

“It is life,” he replied bluntly. “It is real. It is true. And I must
write life as I see it.”

She made no answer, and for an awkward moment they sat silent. It was
because he loved her that he did not quite understand her, and she
could not understand him because he was so large that he bulked beyond
her horizon.

“Well, I’ve collected from the _Transcontinental_,” he said in an
effort to shift the conversation to a more comfortable subject. The
picture of the bewhiskered trio, as he had last seen them, mulcted of
four dollars and ninety cents and a ferry ticket, made him chuckle.

“Then you’ll come!” she cried joyously. “That was what I came to find
out.”

“Come?” he muttered absently. “Where?”

“Why, to dinner to-morrow. You know you said you’d recover your suit if
you got that money.”

“I forgot all about it,” he said humbly. “You see, this morning the
poundman got Maria’s two cows and the baby calf, and—well, it happened
that Maria didn’t have any money, and so I had to recover her cows for
her. That’s where the _Transcontinental_ fiver went—‘The Ring of Bells’
went into the poundman’s pocket.”

“Then you won’t come?”

He looked down at his clothing.

“I can’t.”

Tears of disappointment and reproach glistened in her blue eyes, but
she said nothing.

“Next Thanksgiving you’ll have dinner with me in Delmonico’s,” he said
cheerily; “or in London, or Paris, or anywhere you wish. I know it.”

“I saw in the paper a few days ago,” she announced abruptly, “that
there had been several local appointments to the Railway Mail. You
passed first, didn’t you?”

He was compelled to admit that the call had come for him, but that he
had declined it. “I was so sure—I am so sure—of myself,” he concluded.
“A year from now I’ll be earning more than a dozen men in the Railway
Mail. You wait and see.”

“Oh,” was all she said, when he finished. She stood up, pulling at her
gloves. “I must go, Martin. Arthur is waiting for me.”

He took her in his arms and kissed her, but she proved a passive
sweetheart. There was no tenseness in her body, her arms did not go
around him, and her lips met his without their wonted pressure.

She was angry with him, he concluded, as he returned from the gate. But
why? It was unfortunate that the poundman had gobbled Maria’s cows. But
it was only a stroke of fate. Nobody could be blamed for it. Nor did it
enter his head that he could have done aught otherwise than what he had
done. Well, yes, he was to blame a little, was his next thought, for
having refused the call to the Railway Mail. And she had not liked
“Wiki-Wiki.”

He turned at the head of the steps to meet the letter-carrier on his
afternoon round. The ever recurrent fever of expectancy assailed Martin
as he took the bundle of long envelopes. One was not long. It was short
and thin, and outside was printed the address of _The New York
Outview_. He paused in the act of tearing the envelope open. It could
not be an acceptance. He had no manuscripts with that publication.
Perhaps—his heart almost stood still at the—wild thought—perhaps they
were ordering an article from him; but the next instant he dismissed
the surmise as hopelessly impossible.

It was a short, formal letter, signed by the office editor, merely
informing him that an anonymous letter which they had received was
enclosed, and that he could rest assured the _Outview’s_ staff never
under any circumstances gave consideration to anonymous correspondence.

The enclosed letter Martin found to be crudely printed by hand. It was
a hotchpotch of illiterate abuse of Martin, and of assertion that the
“so-called Martin Eden” who was selling stories to magazines was no
writer at all, and that in reality he was stealing stories from old
magazines, typing them, and sending them out as his own. The envelope
was postmarked “San Leandro.” Martin did not require a second thought
to discover the author. Higginbotham’s grammar, Higginbotham’s
colloquialisms, Higginbotham’s mental quirks and processes, were
apparent throughout. Martin saw in every line, not the fine Italian
hand, but the coarse grocer’s fist, of his brother-in-law.

But why? he vainly questioned. What injury had he done Bernard
Higginbotham? The thing was so unreasonable, so wanton. There was no
explaining it. In the course of the week a dozen similar letters were
forwarded to Martin by the editors of various Eastern magazines. The
editors were behaving handsomely, Martin concluded. He was wholly
unknown to them, yet some of them had even been sympathetic. It was
evident that they detested anonymity. He saw that the malicious attempt
to hurt him had failed. In fact, if anything came of it, it was bound
to be good, for at least his name had been called to the attention of a
number of editors. Sometime, perhaps, reading a submitted manuscript of
his, they might remember him as the fellow about whom they had received
an anonymous letter. And who was to say that such a remembrance might
not sway the balance of their judgment just a trifle in his favor?

It was about this time that Martin took a great slump in Maria’s
estimation. He found her in the kitchen one morning groaning with pain,
tears of weakness running down her cheeks, vainly endeavoring to put
through a large ironing. He promptly diagnosed her affliction as La
Grippe, dosed her with hot whiskey (the remnants in the bottles for
which Brissenden was responsible), and ordered her to bed. But Maria
was refractory. The ironing had to be done, she protested, and
delivered that night, or else there would be no food on the morrow for
the seven small and hungry Silvas.

To her astonishment (and it was something that she never ceased from
relating to her dying day), she saw Martin Eden seize an iron from the
stove and throw a fancy shirt-waist on the ironing-board. It was Kate
Flanagan’s best Sunday waist, than whom there was no more exacting and
fastidiously dressed woman in Maria’s world. Also, Miss Flanagan had
sent special instruction that said waist must be delivered by that
night. As every one knew, she was keeping company with John Collins,
the blacksmith, and, as Maria knew privily, Miss Flanagan and Mr.
Collins were going next day to Golden Gate Park. Vain was Maria’s
attempt to rescue the garment. Martin guided her tottering footsteps to
a chair, from where she watched him with bulging eyes. In a quarter of
the time it would have taken her she saw the shirt-waist safely ironed,
and ironed as well as she could have done it, as Martin made her grant.

“I could work faster,” he explained, “if your irons were only hotter.”

To her, the irons he swung were much hotter than she ever dared to use.

“Your sprinkling is all wrong,” he complained next. “Here, let me teach
you how to sprinkle. Pressure is what’s wanted. Sprinkle under pressure
if you want to iron fast.”

He procured a packing-case from the woodpile in the cellar, fitted a
cover to it, and raided the scrap-iron the Silva tribe was collecting
for the junkman. With fresh-sprinkled garments in the box, covered with
the board and pressed by the iron, the device was complete and in
operation.

“Now you watch me, Maria,” he said, stripping off to his undershirt and
gripping an iron that was what he called “really hot.”

“An’ when he feenish da iron’ he washa da wools,” as she described it
afterward. “He say, ‘Maria, you are da greata fool. I showa you how to
washa da wools,’ an’ he shows me, too. Ten minutes he maka da
machine—one barrel, one wheel-hub, two poles, justa like dat.”

Martin had learned the contrivance from Joe at the Shelly Hot Springs.
The old wheel-hub, fixed on the end of the upright pole, constituted
the plunger. Making this, in turn, fast to the spring-pole attached to
the kitchen rafters, so that the hub played upon the woollens in the
barrel, he was able, with one hand, thoroughly to pound them.

“No more Maria washa da wools,” her story always ended. “I maka da kids
worka da pole an’ da hub an’ da barrel. Him da smarta man, Mister
Eden.”

Nevertheless, by his masterly operation and improvement of her
kitchen-laundry he fell an immense distance in her regard. The glamour
of romance with which her imagination had invested him faded away in
the cold light of fact that he was an ex-laundryman. All his books, and
his grand friends who visited him in carriages or with countless
bottles of whiskey, went for naught. He was, after all, a mere
workingman, a member of her own class and caste. He was more human and
approachable, but, he was no longer mystery.

Martin’s alienation from his family continued. Following upon Mr.
Higginbotham’s unprovoked attack, Mr. Hermann von Schmidt showed his
hand. The fortunate sale of several storiettes, some humorous verse,
and a few jokes gave Martin a temporary splurge of prosperity. Not only
did he partially pay up his bills, but he had sufficient balance left
to redeem his black suit and wheel. The latter, by virtue of a twisted
crank-hanger, required repairing, and, as a matter of friendliness with
his future brother-in-law, he sent it to Von Schmidt’s shop.

The afternoon of the same day Martin was pleased by the wheel being
delivered by a small boy. Von Schmidt was also inclined to be friendly,
was Martin’s conclusion from this unusual favor. Repaired wheels
usually had to be called for. But when he examined the wheel, he
discovered no repairs had been made. A little later in the day he
telephoned his sister’s betrothed, and learned that that person didn’t
want anything to do with him in “any shape, manner, or form.”

“Hermann von Schmidt,” Martin answered cheerfully, “I’ve a good mind to
come over and punch that Dutch nose of yours.”

“You come to my shop,” came the reply, “an’ I’ll send for the police.
An’ I’ll put you through, too. Oh, I know you, but you can’t make no
rough-house with me. I don’t want nothin’ to do with the likes of you.
You’re a loafer, that’s what, an’ I ain’t asleep. You ain’t goin’ to do
no spongin’ off me just because I’m marryin’ your sister. Why don’t you
go to work an’ earn an honest livin’, eh? Answer me that.”

Martin’s philosophy asserted itself, dissipating his anger, and he hung
up the receiver with a long whistle of incredulous amusement. But after
the amusement came the reaction, and he was oppressed by his
loneliness. Nobody understood him, nobody seemed to have any use for
him, except Brissenden, and Brissenden had disappeared, God alone knew
where.

Twilight was falling as Martin left the fruit store and turned
homeward, his marketing on his arm. At the corner an electric car had
stopped, and at sight of a lean, familiar figure alighting, his heart
leapt with joy. It was Brissenden, and in the fleeting glimpse, ere the
car started up, Martin noted the overcoat pockets, one bulging with
books, the other bulging with a quart bottle of whiskey.




CHAPTER XXXV.


Brissenden gave no explanation of his long absence, nor did Martin pry
into it. He was content to see his friend’s cadaverous face opposite
him through the steam rising from a tumbler of toddy.

“I, too, have not been idle,” Brissenden proclaimed, after hearing
Martin’s account of the work he had accomplished.

He pulled a manuscript from his inside coat pocket and passed it to
Martin, who looked at the title and glanced up curiously.

“Yes, that’s it,” Brissenden laughed. “Pretty good title, eh?
‘Ephemera’—it is the one word. And you’re responsible for it, what of
your _man_, who is always the erected, the vitalized inorganic, the
latest of the ephemera, the creature of temperature strutting his
little space on the thermometer. It got into my head and I had to write
it to get rid of it. Tell me what you think of it.”

Martin’s face, flushed at first, paled as he read on. It was perfect
art. Form triumphed over substance, if triumph it could be called where
the last conceivable atom of substance had found expression in so
perfect construction as to make Martin’s head swim with delight, to put
passionate tears into his eyes, and to send chills creeping up and down
his back. It was a long poem of six or seven hundred lines, and it was
a fantastic, amazing, unearthly thing. It was terrific, impossible; and
yet there it was, scrawled in black ink across the sheets of paper. It
dealt with man and his soul-gropings in their ultimate terms, plumbing
the abysses of space for the testimony of remotest suns and rainbow
spectrums. It was a mad orgy of imagination, wassailing in the skull of
a dying man who half sobbed under his breath and was quick with the
wild flutter of fading heart-beats. The poem swung in majestic rhythm
to the cool tumult of interstellar conflict, to the onset of starry
hosts, to the impact of cold suns and the flaming up of nebulae in the
darkened void; and through it all, unceasing and faint, like a silver
shuttle, ran the frail, piping voice of man, a querulous chirp amid the
screaming of planets and the crash of systems.

“There is nothing like it in literature,” Martin said, when at last he
was able to speak. “It’s wonderful!—wonderful! It has gone to my head.
I am drunken with it. That great, infinitesimal question—I can’t shake
it out of my thoughts. That questing, eternal, ever recurring, thin
little wailing voice of man is still ringing in my ears. It is like the
dead-march of a gnat amid the trumpeting of elephants and the roaring
of lions. It is insatiable with microscopic desire. I now I’m making a
fool of myself, but the thing has obsessed me. You are—I don’t know
what you are—you are wonderful, that’s all. But how do you do it? How
do you do it?”

Martin paused from his rhapsody, only to break out afresh.

“I shall never write again. I am a dauber in clay. You have shown me
the work of the real artificer-artisan. Genius! This is something more
than genius. It transcends genius. It is truth gone mad. It is true,
man, every line of it. I wonder if you realize that, you dogmatist.
Science cannot give you the lie. It is the truth of the sneer, stamped
out from the black iron of the Cosmos and interwoven with mighty
rhythms of sound into a fabric of splendor and beauty. And now I won’t
say another word. I am overwhelmed, crushed. Yes, I will, too. Let me
market it for you.”

Brissenden grinned. “There’s not a magazine in Christendom that would
dare to publish it—you know that.”

“I know nothing of the sort. I know there’s not a magazine in
Christendom that wouldn’t jump at it. They don’t get things like that
every day. That’s no mere poem of the year. It’s the poem of the
century.”

“I’d like to take you up on the proposition.”

“Now don’t get cynical,” Martin exhorted. “The magazine editors are not
wholly fatuous. I know that. And I’ll close with you on the bet. I’ll
wager anything you want that ‘Ephemera’ is accepted either on the first
or second offering.”

“There’s just one thing that prevents me from taking you.” Brissenden
waited a moment. “The thing is big—the biggest I’ve ever done. I know
that. It’s my swan song. I am almighty proud of it. I worship it. It’s
better than whiskey. It is what I dreamed of—the great and perfect
thing—when I was a simple young man, with sweet illusions and clean
ideals. And I’ve got it, now, in my last grasp, and I’ll not have it
pawed over and soiled by a lot of swine. No, I won’t take the bet. It’s
mine. I made it, and I’ve shared it with you.”

“But think of the rest of the world,” Martin protested. “The function
of beauty is joy-making.”

“It’s my beauty.”

“Don’t be selfish.”

“I’m not selfish.” Brissenden grinned soberly in the way he had when
pleased by the thing his thin lips were about to shape. “I’m as
unselfish as a famished hog.”

In vain Martin strove to shake him from his decision. Martin told him
that his hatred of the magazines was rabid, fanatical, and that his
conduct was a thousand times more despicable than that of the youth who
burned the temple of Diana at Ephesus. Under the storm of denunciation
Brissenden complacently sipped his toddy and affirmed that everything
the other said was quite true, with the exception of the magazine
editors. His hatred of them knew no bounds, and he excelled Martin in
denunciation when he turned upon them.

“I wish you’d type it for me,” he said. “You know how a thousand times
better than any stenographer. And now I want to give you some advice.”
He drew a bulky manuscript from his outside coat pocket. “Here’s your
‘Shame of the Sun.’ I’ve read it not once, but twice and three
times—the highest compliment I can pay you. After what you’ve said
about ‘Ephemera’ I must be silent. But this I will say: when ‘The Shame
of the Sun’ is published, it will make a hit. It will start a
controversy that will be worth thousands to you just in advertising.”

Martin laughed. “I suppose your next advice will be to submit it to the
magazines.”

“By all means no—that is, if you want to see it in print. Offer it to
the first-class houses. Some publisher’s reader may be mad enough or
drunk enough to report favorably on it. You’ve read the books. The meat
of them has been transmuted in the alembic of Martin Eden’s mind and
poured into ‘The Shame of the Sun,’ and one day Martin Eden will be
famous, and not the least of his fame will rest upon that work. So you
must get a publisher for it—the sooner the better.”

Brissenden went home late that night; and just as he mounted the first
step of the car, he swung suddenly back on Martin and thrust into his
hand a small, tightly crumpled wad of paper.

“Here, take this,” he said. “I was out to the races to-day, and I had
the right dope.”

The bell clanged and the car pulled out, leaving Martin wondering as to
the nature of the crinkly, greasy wad he clutched in his hand. Back in
his room he unrolled it and found a hundred-dollar bill.

He did not scruple to use it. He knew his friend had always plenty of
money, and he knew also, with profound certitude, that his success
would enable him to repay it. In the morning he paid every bill, gave
Maria three months’ advance on the room, and redeemed every pledge at
the pawnshop. Next he bought Marian’s wedding present, and simpler
presents, suitable to Christmas, for Ruth and Gertrude. And finally, on
the balance remaining to him, he herded the whole Silva tribe down into
Oakland. He was a winter late in redeeming his promise, but redeemed it
was, for the last, least Silva got a pair of shoes, as well as Maria
herself. Also, there were horns, and dolls, and toys of various sorts,
and parcels and bundles of candies and nuts that filled the arms of all
the Silvas to overflowing.

It was with this extraordinary procession trooping at his and Maria’s
heels into a confectioner’s in quest of the biggest candy-cane ever
made, that he encountered Ruth and her mother. Mrs. Morse was shocked.
Even Ruth was hurt, for she had some regard for appearances, and her
lover, cheek by jowl with Maria, at the head of that army of Portuguese
ragamuffins, was not a pretty sight. But it was not that which hurt so
much as what she took to be his lack of pride and self-respect.
Further, and keenest of all, she read into the incident the
impossibility of his living down his working-class origin. There was
stigma enough in the fact of it, but shamelessly to flaunt it in the
face of the world—her world—was going too far. Though her engagement to
Martin had been kept secret, their long intimacy had not been
unproductive of gossip; and in the shop, glancing covertly at her lover
and his following, had been several of her acquaintances. She lacked
the easy largeness of Martin and could not rise superior to her
environment. She had been hurt to the quick, and her sensitive nature
was quivering with the shame of it. So it was, when Martin arrived
later in the day, that he kept her present in his breast-pocket,
deferring the giving of it to a more propitious occasion. Ruth in
tears—passionate, angry tears—was a revelation to him. The spectacle of
her suffering convinced him that he had been a brute, yet in the soul
of him he could not see how nor why. It never entered his head to be
ashamed of those he knew, and to take the Silvas out to a Christmas
treat could in no way, so it seemed to him, show lack of consideration
for Ruth. On the other hand, he did see Ruth’s point of view, after she
had explained it; and he looked upon it as a feminine weakness, such as
afflicted all women and the best of women.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


“Come on,—I’ll show you the real dirt,” Brissenden said to him, one
evening in January.

They had dined together in San Francisco, and were at the Ferry
Building, returning to Oakland, when the whim came to him to show
Martin the “real dirt.” He turned and fled across the water-front, a
meagre shadow in a flapping overcoat, with Martin straining to keep up
with him. At a wholesale liquor store he bought two gallon-demijohns of
old port, and with one in each hand boarded a Mission Street car,
Martin at his heels burdened with several quart-bottles of whiskey.

If Ruth could see me now, was his thought, while he wondered as to what
constituted the real dirt.

“Maybe nobody will be there,” Brissenden said, when they dismounted and
plunged off to the right into the heart of the working-class ghetto,
south of Market Street. “In which case you’ll miss what you’ve been
looking for so long.”

“And what the deuce is that?” Martin asked.

“Men, intelligent men, and not the gibbering nonentities I found you
consorting with in that trader’s den. You read the books and you found
yourself all alone. Well, I’m going to show you to-night some other men
who’ve read the books, so that you won’t be lonely any more.”

“Not that I bother my head about their everlasting discussions,” he
said at the end of a block. “I’m not interested in book philosophy. But
you’ll find these fellows intelligences and not bourgeois swine. But
watch out, they’ll talk an arm off of you on any subject under the
sun.”

“Hope Norton’s there,” he panted a little later, resisting Martin’s
effort to relieve him of the two demijohns. “Norton’s an idealist—a
Harvard man. Prodigious memory. Idealism led him to philosophic
anarchy, and his family threw him off. Father’s a railroad president
and many times millionnaire, but the son’s starving in ’Frisco, editing
an anarchist sheet for twenty-five a month.”

Martin was little acquainted in San Francisco, and not at all south of
Market; so he had no idea of where he was being led.

“Go ahead,” he said; “tell me about them beforehand. What do they do
for a living? How do they happen to be here?”

“Hope Hamilton’s there.” Brissenden paused and rested his hands.
“Strawn-Hamilton’s his name—hyphenated, you know—comes of old Southern
stock. He’s a tramp—laziest man I ever knew, though he’s clerking, or
trying to, in a socialist coöperative store for six dollars a week. But
he’s a confirmed hobo. Tramped into town. I’ve seen him sit all day on
a bench and never a bite pass his lips, and in the evening, when I
invited him to dinner—restaurant two blocks away—have him say, ‘Too
much trouble, old man. Buy me a package of cigarettes instead.’ He was
a Spencerian like you till Kreis turned him to materialistic monism.
I’ll start him on monism if I can. Norton’s another monist—only he
affirms naught but spirit. He can give Kreis and Hamilton all they
want, too.”

“Who is Kreis?” Martin asked.

“His rooms we’re going to. One time professor—fired from
university—usual story. A mind like a steel trap. Makes his living any
old way. I know he’s been a street fakir when he was down.
Unscrupulous. Rob a corpse of a shroud—anything. Difference between him
and the bourgeoisie is that he robs without illusion. He’ll talk
Nietzsche, or Schopenhauer, or Kant, or anything, but the only thing in
this world, not excepting Mary, that he really cares for, is his
monism. Haeckel is his little tin god. The only way to insult him is to
take a slap at Haeckel.”

“Here’s the hang-out.” Brissenden rested his demijohn at the upstairs
entrance, preliminary to the climb. It was the usual two-story corner
building, with a saloon and grocery underneath. “The gang lives
here—got the whole upstairs to themselves. But Kreis is the only one
who has two rooms. Come on.”

No lights burned in the upper hall, but Brissenden threaded the utter
blackness like a familiar ghost. He stopped to speak to Martin.

“There’s one fellow—Stevens—a theosophist. Makes a pretty tangle when
he gets going. Just now he’s dish-washer in a restaurant. Likes a good
cigar. I’ve seen him eat in a ten-cent hash-house and pay fifty cents
for the cigar he smoked afterward. I’ve got a couple in my pocket for
him, if he shows up.”

“And there’s another fellow—Parry—an Australian, a statistician and a
sporting encyclopaedia. Ask him the grain output of Paraguay for 1903,
or the English importation of sheetings into China for 1890, or at what
weight Jimmy Britt fought Battling Nelson, or who was welter-weight
champion of the United States in ’68, and you’ll get the correct answer
with the automatic celerity of a slot-machine. And there’s Andy, a
stone-mason, has ideas on everything, a good chess-player; and another
fellow, Harry, a baker, red hot socialist and strong union man. By the
way, you remember Cooks’ and Waiters’ strike—Hamilton was the chap who
organized that union and precipitated the strike—planned it all out in
advance, right here in Kreis’s rooms. Did it just for the fun of it,
but was too lazy to stay by the union. Yet he could have risen high if
he wanted to. There’s no end to the possibilities in that man—if he
weren’t so insuperably lazy.”

Brissenden advanced through the darkness till a thread of light marked
the threshold of a door. A knock and an answer opened it, and Martin
found himself shaking hands with Kreis, a handsome brunette man, with
dazzling white teeth, a drooping black mustache, and large, flashing
black eyes. Mary, a matronly young blonde, was washing dishes in the
little back room that served for kitchen and dining room. The front
room served as bedchamber and living room. Overhead was the week’s
washing, hanging in festoons so low that Martin did not see at first
the two men talking in a corner. They hailed Brissenden and his
demijohns with acclamation, and, on being introduced, Martin learned
they were Andy and Parry. He joined them and listened attentively to
the description of a prize-fight Parry had seen the night before; while
Brissenden, in his glory, plunged into the manufacture of a toddy and
the serving of wine and whiskey-and-sodas. At his command, “Bring in
the clan,” Andy departed to go the round of the rooms for the lodgers.

“We’re lucky that most of them are here,” Brissenden whispered to
Martin. “There’s Norton and Hamilton; come on and meet them. Stevens
isn’t around, I hear. I’m going to get them started on monism if I can.
Wait till they get a few jolts in them and they’ll warm up.”

At first the conversation was desultory. Nevertheless Martin could not
fail to appreciate the keen play of their minds. They were men with
opinions, though the opinions often clashed, and, though they were
witty and clever, they were not superficial. He swiftly saw, no matter
upon what they talked, that each man applied the correlation of
knowledge and had also a deep-seated and unified conception of society
and the Cosmos. Nobody manufactured their opinions for them; they were
all rebels of one variety or another, and their lips were strangers to
platitudes. Never had Martin, at the Morses’, heard so amazing a range
of topics discussed. There seemed no limit save time to the things they
were alive to. The talk wandered from Mrs. Humphry Ward’s new book to
Shaw’s latest play, through the future of the drama to reminiscences of
Mansfield. They appreciated or sneered at the morning editorials,
jumped from labor conditions in New Zealand to Henry James and Brander
Matthews, passed on to the German designs in the Far East and the
economic aspect of the Yellow Peril, wrangled over the German elections
and Bebel’s last speech, and settled down to local politics, the latest
plans and scandals in the union labor party administration, and the
wires that were pulled to bring about the Coast Seamen’s strike. Martin
was struck by the inside knowledge they possessed. They knew what was
never printed in the newspapers—the wires and strings and the hidden
hands that made the puppets dance. To Martin’s surprise, the girl,
Mary, joined in the conversation, displaying an intelligence he had
never encountered in the few women he had met. They talked together on
Swinburne and Rossetti, after which she led him beyond his depth into
the by-paths of French literature. His revenge came when she defended
Maeterlinck and he brought into action the carefully-thought-out thesis
of “The Shame of the Sun.”

Several other men had dropped in, and the air was thick with tobacco
smoke, when Brissenden waved the red flag.

“Here’s fresh meat for your axe, Kreis,” he said; “a rose-white youth
with the ardor of a lover for Herbert Spencer. Make a Haeckelite of
him—if you can.”

Kreis seemed to wake up and flash like some metallic, magnetic thing,
while Norton looked at Martin sympathetically, with a sweet, girlish
smile, as much as to say that he would be amply protected.

Kreis began directly on Martin, but step by step Norton interfered,
until he and Kreis were off and away in a personal battle. Martin
listened and fain would have rubbed his eyes. It was impossible that
this should be, much less in the labor ghetto south of Market. The
books were alive in these men. They talked with fire and enthusiasm,
the intellectual stimulant stirring them as he had seen drink and anger
stir other men. What he heard was no longer the philosophy of the dry,
printed word, written by half-mythical demigods like Kant and Spencer.
It was living philosophy, with warm, red blood, incarnated in these two
men till its very features worked with excitement. Now and again other
men joined in, and all followed the discussion with cigarettes going
out in their hands and with alert, intent faces.

Idealism had never attracted Martin, but the exposition it now received
at the hands of Norton was a revelation. The logical plausibility of
it, that made an appeal to his intellect, seemed missed by Kreis and
Hamilton, who sneered at Norton as a metaphysician, and who, in turn,
sneered back at them as metaphysicians. _Phenomenon_ and _noumenon_
were bandied back and forth. They charged him with attempting to
explain consciousness by itself. He charged them with word-jugglery,
with reasoning from words to theory instead of from facts to theory. At
this they were aghast. It was the cardinal tenet of their mode of
reasoning to start with facts and to give names to the facts.

When Norton wandered into the intricacies of Kant, Kreis reminded him
that all good little German philosophies when they died went to Oxford.
A little later Norton reminded them of Hamilton’s Law of Parsimony, the
application of which they immediately claimed for every reasoning
process of theirs. And Martin hugged his knees and exulted in it all.
But Norton was no Spencerian, and he, too, strove for Martin’s
philosophic soul, talking as much at him as to his two opponents.

“You know Berkeley has never been answered,” he said, looking directly
at Martin. “Herbert Spencer came the nearest, which was not very near.
Even the stanchest of Spencer’s followers will not go farther. I was
reading an essay of Saleeby’s the other day, and the best Saleeby could
say was that Herbert Spencer _nearly_ succeeded in answering Berkeley.”

“You know what Hume said?” Hamilton asked. Norton nodded, but Hamilton
gave it for the benefit of the rest. “He said that Berkeley’s arguments
admit of no answer and produce no conviction.”

“In his, Hume’s, mind,” was the reply. “And Hume’s mind was the same as
yours, with this difference: he was wise enough to admit there was no
answering Berkeley.”

Norton was sensitive and excitable, though he never lost his head,
while Kreis and Hamilton were like a pair of cold-blooded savages,
seeking out tender places to prod and poke. As the evening grew late,
Norton, smarting under the repeated charges of being a metaphysician,
clutching his chair to keep from jumping to his feet, his gray eyes
snapping and his girlish face grown harsh and sure, made a grand attack
upon their position.

“All right, you Haeckelites, I may reason like a medicine man, but,
pray, how do you reason? You have nothing to stand on, you unscientific
dogmatists with your positive science which you are always lugging
about into places it has no right to be. Long before the school of
materialistic monism arose, the ground was removed so that there could
be no foundation. Locke was the man, John Locke. Two hundred years
ago—more than that, even in his ‘Essay concerning the Human
Understanding,’ he proved the non-existence of innate ideas. The best
of it is that that is precisely what you claim. To-night, again and
again, you have asserted the non-existence of innate ideas.

“And what does that mean? It means that you can never know ultimate
reality. Your brains are empty when you are born. Appearances, or
phenomena, are all the content your minds can receive from your five
senses. Then noumena, which are not in your minds when you are born,
have no way of getting in—”

“I deny—” Kreis started to interrupt.

“You wait till I’m done,” Norton shouted. “You can know only that much
of the play and interplay of force and matter as impinges in one way or
another on our senses. You see, I am willing to admit, for the sake of
the argument, that matter exists; and what I am about to do is to
efface you by your own argument. I can’t do it any other way, for you
are both congenitally unable to understand a philosophic abstraction.

“And now, what do you know of matter, according to your own positive
science? You know it only by its phenomena, its appearances. You are
aware only of its changes, or of such changes in it as cause changes in
your consciousness. Positive science deals only with phenomena, yet you
are foolish enough to strive to be ontologists and to deal with
noumena. Yet, by the very definition of positive science, science is
concerned only with appearances. As somebody has said, phenomenal
knowledge cannot transcend phenomena.

“You cannot answer Berkeley, even if you have annihilated Kant, and
yet, perforce, you assume that Berkeley is wrong when you affirm that
science proves the non-existence of God, or, as much to the point, the
existence of matter.—You know I granted the reality of matter only in
order to make myself intelligible to your understanding. Be positive
scientists, if you please; but ontology has no place in positive
science, so leave it alone. Spencer is right in his agnosticism, but if
Spencer—”

But it was time to catch the last ferry-boat for Oakland, and
Brissenden and Martin slipped out, leaving Norton still talking and
Kreis and Hamilton waiting to pounce on him like a pair of hounds as
soon as he finished.

“You have given me a glimpse of fairyland,” Martin said on the
ferry-boat. “It makes life worth while to meet people like that. My
mind is all worked up. I never appreciated idealism before. Yet I can’t
accept it. I know that I shall always be a realist. I am so made, I
guess. But I’d like to have made a reply to Kreis and Hamilton, and I
think I’d have had a word or two for Norton. I didn’t see that Spencer
was damaged any. I’m as excited as a child on its first visit to the
circus. I see I must read up some more. I’m going to get hold of
Saleeby. I still think Spencer is unassailable, and next time I’m going
to take a hand myself.”

But Brissenden, breathing painfully, had dropped off to sleep, his chin
buried in a scarf and resting on his sunken chest, his body wrapped in
the long overcoat and shaking to the vibration of the propellers.




CHAPTER XXXVII.


The first thing Martin did next morning was to go counter both to
Brissenden’s advice and command. “The Shame of the Sun” he wrapped and
mailed to _The Acropolis_. He believed he could find magazine
publication for it, and he felt that recognition by the magazines would
commend him to the book-publishing houses. “Ephemera” he likewise
wrapped and mailed to a magazine. Despite Brissenden’s prejudice
against the magazines, which was a pronounced mania with him, Martin
decided that the great poem should see print. He did not intend,
however, to publish it without the other’s permission. His plan was to
get it accepted by one of the high magazines, and, thus armed, again to
wrestle with Brissenden for consent.

Martin began, that morning, a story which he had sketched out a number
of weeks before and which ever since had been worrying him with its
insistent clamor to be created. Apparently it was to be a rattling sea
story, a tale of twentieth-century adventure and romance, handling real
characters, in a real world, under real conditions. But beneath the
swing and go of the story was to be something else—something that the
superficial reader would never discern and which, on the other hand,
would not diminish in any way the interest and enjoyment for such a
reader. It was this, and not the mere story, that impelled Martin to
write it. For that matter, it was always the great, universal motif
that suggested plots to him. After having found such a motif, he cast
about for the particular persons and particular location in time and
space wherewith and wherein to utter the universal thing. “Overdue” was
the title he had decided for it, and its length he believed would not
be more than sixty thousand words—a bagatelle for him with his splendid
vigor of production. On this first day he took hold of it with
conscious delight in the mastery of his tools. He no longer worried for
fear that the sharp, cutting edges should slip and mar his work. The
long months of intense application and study had brought their reward.
He could now devote himself with sure hand to the larger phases of the
thing he shaped; and as he worked, hour after hour, he felt, as never
before, the sure and cosmic grasp with which he held life and the
affairs of life. “Overdue” would tell a story that would be true of its
particular characters and its particular events; but it would tell,
too, he was confident, great vital things that would be true of all
time, and all sea, and all life—thanks to Herbert Spencer, he thought,
leaning back for a moment from the table. Ay, thanks to Herbert Spencer
and to the master-key of life, evolution, which Spencer had placed in
his hands.

He was conscious that it was great stuff he was writing. “It will go!
It will go!” was the refrain that kept sounding in his ears. Of course
it would go. At last he was turning out the thing at which the
magazines would jump. The whole story worked out before him in
lightning flashes. He broke off from it long enough to write a
paragraph in his note-book. This would be the last paragraph in
“Overdue”; but so thoroughly was the whole book already composed in his
brain that he could write, weeks before he had arrived at the end, the
end itself. He compared the tale, as yet unwritten, with the tales of
the sea-writers, and he felt it to be immeasurably superior. “There’s
only one man who could touch it,” he murmured aloud, “and that’s
Conrad. And it ought to make even him sit up and shake hands with me,
and say, ‘Well done, Martin, my boy.’”

He toiled on all day, recollecting, at the last moment, that he was to
have dinner at the Morses’. Thanks to Brissenden, his black suit was
out of pawn and he was again eligible for dinner parties. Down town he
stopped off long enough to run into the library and search for
Saleeby’s books. He drew out “The Cycle of Life,” and on the car turned
to the essay Norton had mentioned on Spencer. As Martin read, he grew
angry. His face flushed, his jaw set, and unconsciously his hand
clenched, unclenched, and clenched again as if he were taking fresh
grips upon some hateful thing out of which he was squeezing the life.
When he left the car, he strode along the sidewalk as a wrathful man
will stride, and he rang the Morse bell with such viciousness that it
roused him to consciousness of his condition, so that he entered in
good nature, smiling with amusement at himself. No sooner, however, was
he inside than a great depression descended upon him. He fell from the
height where he had been up-borne all day on the wings of inspiration.
“Bourgeois,” “trader’s den”—Brissenden’s epithets repeated themselves
in his mind. But what of that? he demanded angrily. He was marrying
Ruth, not her family.

It seemed to him that he had never seen Ruth more beautiful, more
spiritual and ethereal and at the same time more healthy. There was
color in her cheeks, and her eyes drew him again and again—the eyes in
which he had first read immortality. He had forgotten immortality of
late, and the trend of his scientific reading had been away from it;
but here, in Ruth’s eyes, he read an argument without words that
transcended all worded arguments. He saw that in her eyes before which
all discussion fled away, for he saw love there. And in his own eyes
was love; and love was unanswerable. Such was his passionate doctrine.

The half hour he had with her, before they went in to dinner, left him
supremely happy and supremely satisfied with life. Nevertheless, at
table, the inevitable reaction and exhaustion consequent upon the hard
day seized hold of him. He was aware that his eyes were tired and that
he was irritable. He remembered it was at this table, at which he now
sneered and was so often bored, that he had first eaten with civilized
beings in what he had imagined was an atmosphere of high culture and
refinement. He caught a glimpse of that pathetic figure of him, so long
ago, a self-conscious savage, sprouting sweat at every pore in an agony
of apprehension, puzzled by the bewildering minutiae of
eating-implements, tortured by the ogre of a servant, striving at a
leap to live at such dizzy social altitude, and deciding in the end to
be frankly himself, pretending no knowledge and no polish he did not
possess.

He glanced at Ruth for reassurance, much in the same manner that a
passenger, with sudden panic thought of possible shipwreck, will strive
to locate the life preservers. Well, that much had come out of it—love
and Ruth. All the rest had failed to stand the test of the books. But
Ruth and love had stood the test; for them he found a biological
sanction. Love was the most exalted expression of life. Nature had been
busy designing him, as she had been busy with all normal men, for the
purpose of loving. She had spent ten thousand centuries—ay, a hundred
thousand and a million centuries—upon the task, and he was the best she
could do. She had made love the strongest thing in him, increased its
power a myriad per cent with her gift of imagination, and sent him
forth into the ephemera to thrill and melt and mate. His hand sought
Ruth’s hand beside him hidden by the table, and a warm pressure was
given and received. She looked at him a swift instant, and her eyes
were radiant and melting. So were his in the thrill that pervaded him;
nor did he realize how much that was radiant and melting in her eyes
had been aroused by what she had seen in his.

Across the table from him, cater-cornered, at Mr. Morse’s right, sat
Judge Blount, a local superior court judge. Martin had met him a number
of times and had failed to like him. He and Ruth’s father were
discussing labor union politics, the local situation, and socialism,
and Mr. Morse was endeavoring to twit Martin on the latter topic. At
last Judge Blount looked across the table with benignant and fatherly
pity. Martin smiled to himself.

“You’ll grow out of it, young man,” he said soothingly. “Time is the
best cure for such youthful distempers.” He turned to Mr. Morse. “I do
not believe discussion is good in such cases. It makes the patient
obstinate.”

“That is true,” the other assented gravely. “But it is well to warn the
patient occasionally of his condition.”

Martin laughed merrily, but it was with an effort. The day had been too
long, the day’s effort too intense, and he was deep in the throes of
the reaction.

“Undoubtedly you are both excellent doctors,” he said; “but if you care
a whit for the opinion of the patient, let him tell you that you are
poor diagnosticians. In fact, you are both suffering from the disease
you think you find in me. As for me, I am immune. The socialist
philosophy that riots half-baked in your veins has passed me by.”

“Clever, clever,” murmured the judge. “An excellent ruse in
controversy, to reverse positions.”

“Out of your mouth.” Martin’s eyes were sparkling, but he kept control
of himself. “You see, Judge, I’ve heard your campaign speeches. By some
henidical process—henidical, by the way is a favorite word of mine
which nobody understands—by some henidical process you persuade
yourself that you believe in the competitive system and the survival of
the strong, and at the same time you indorse with might and main all
sorts of measures to shear the strength from the strong.”

“My young man—”

“Remember, I’ve heard your campaign speeches,” Martin warned. “It’s on
record, your position on interstate commerce regulation, on regulation
of the railway trust and Standard Oil, on the conservation of the
forests, on a thousand and one restrictive measures that are nothing
else than socialistic.”

“Do you mean to tell me that you do not believe in regulating these
various outrageous exercises of power?”

“That’s not the point. I mean to tell you that you are a poor
diagnostician. I mean to tell you that I am not suffering from the
microbe of socialism. I mean to tell you that it is you who are
suffering from the emasculating ravages of that same microbe. As for
me, I am an inveterate opponent of socialism just as I am an inveterate
opponent of your own mongrel democracy that is nothing else than
pseudo-socialism masquerading under a garb of words that will not stand
the test of the dictionary.”

“I am a reactionary—so complete a reactionary that my position is
incomprehensible to you who live in a veiled lie of social organization
and whose sight is not keen enough to pierce the veil. You make believe
that you believe in the survival of the strong and the rule of the
strong. I believe. That is the difference. When I was a trifle
younger,—a few months younger,—I believed the same thing. You see, the
ideas of you and yours had impressed me. But merchants and traders are
cowardly rulers at best; they grunt and grub all their days in the
trough of money-getting, and I have swung back to aristocracy, if you
please. I am the only individualist in this room. I look to the state
for nothing. I look only to the strong man, the man on horseback, to
save the state from its own rotten futility.”

“Nietzsche was right. I won’t take the time to tell you who Nietzsche
was, but he was right. The world belongs to the strong—to the strong
who are noble as well and who do not wallow in the swine-trough of
trade and exchange. The world belongs to the true nobleman, to the
great blond beasts, to the noncompromisers, to the ‘yes-sayers.’ And
they will eat you up, you socialists—who are afraid of socialism and
who think yourselves individualists. Your slave-morality of the meek
and lowly will never save you.—Oh, it’s all Greek, I know, and I won’t
bother you any more with it. But remember one thing. There aren’t half
a dozen individualists in Oakland, but Martin Eden is one of them.”

He signified that he was done with the discussion, and turned to Ruth.

“I’m wrought up to-day,” he said in an undertone. “All I want to do is
to love, not talk.”

He ignored Mr. Morse, who said:-

“I am unconvinced. All socialists are Jesuits. That is the way to tell
them.”

“We’ll make a good Republican out of you yet,” said Judge Blount.

“The man on horseback will arrive before that time,” Martin retorted
with good humor, and returned to Ruth.

But Mr. Morse was not content. He did not like the laziness and the
disinclination for sober, legitimate work of this prospective
son-in-law of his, for whose ideas he had no respect and of whose
nature he had no understanding. So he turned the conversation to
Herbert Spencer. Judge Blount ably seconded him, and Martin, whose ears
had pricked at the first mention of the philosopher’s name, listened to
the judge enunciate a grave and complacent diatribe against Spencer.
From time to time Mr. Morse glanced at Martin, as much as to say,
“There, my boy, you see.”

“Chattering daws,” Martin muttered under his breath, and went on
talking with Ruth and Arthur.

But the long day and the “real dirt” of the night before were telling
upon him; and, besides, still in his burnt mind was what had made him
angry when he read it on the car.

“What is the matter?” Ruth asked suddenly alarmed by the effort he was
making to contain himself.

“There is no god but the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is its
prophet,” Judge Blount was saying at that moment.

Martin turned upon him.

“A cheap judgment,” he remarked quietly. “I heard it first in the City
Hall Park, on the lips of a workingman who ought to have known better.
I have heard it often since, and each time the clap-trap of it
nauseates me. You ought to be ashamed of yourself. To hear that great
and noble man’s name upon your lips is like finding a dew-drop in a
cesspool. You are disgusting.”

It was like a thunderbolt. Judge Blount glared at him with apoplectic
countenance, and silence reigned. Mr. Morse was secretly pleased. He
could see that his daughter was shocked. It was what he wanted to do—to
bring out the innate ruffianism of this man he did not like.

Ruth’s hand sought Martin’s beseechingly under the table, but his blood
was up. He was inflamed by the intellectual pretence and fraud of those
who sat in the high places. A Superior Court Judge! It was only several
years before that he had looked up from the mire at such glorious
entities and deemed them gods.

Judge Blount recovered himself and attempted to go on, addressing
himself to Martin with an assumption of politeness that the latter
understood was for the benefit of the ladies. Even this added to his
anger. Was there no honesty in the world?

“You can’t discuss Spencer with me,” he cried. “You do not know any
more about Spencer than do his own countrymen. But it is no fault of
yours, I grant. It is just a phase of the contemptible ignorance of the
times. I ran across a sample of it on my way here this evening. I was
reading an essay by Saleeby on Spencer. You should read it. It is
accessible to all men. You can buy it in any book-store or draw it from
the public library. You would feel ashamed of your paucity of abuse and
ignorance of that noble man compared with what Saleeby has collected on
the subject. It is a record of shame that would shame your shame.

“‘The philosopher of the half-educated,’ he was called by an academic
Philosopher who was not worthy to pollute the atmosphere he breathed. I
don’t think you have read ten pages of Spencer, but there have been
critics, assumably more intelligent than you, who have read no more
than you of Spencer, who publicly challenged his followers to adduce
one single idea from all his writings—from Herbert Spencer’s writings,
the man who has impressed the stamp of his genius over the whole field
of scientific research and modern thought; the father of psychology;
the man who revolutionized pedagogy, so that to-day the child of the
French peasant is taught the three R’s according to principles laid
down by him. And the little gnats of men sting his memory when they get
their very bread and butter from the technical application of his
ideas. What little of worth resides in their brains is largely due to
him. It is certain that had he never lived, most of what is correct in
their parrot-learned knowledge would be absent.

“And yet a man like Principal Fairbanks of Oxford—a man who sits in an
even higher place than you, Judge Blount—has said that Spencer will be
dismissed by posterity as a poet and dreamer rather than a thinker.
Yappers and blatherskites, the whole brood of them! ‘“First Principles”
is not wholly destitute of a certain literary power,’ said one of them.
And others of them have said that he was an industrious plodder rather
than an original thinker. Yappers and blatherskites! Yappers and
blatherskites!”

Martin ceased abruptly, in a dead silence. Everybody in Ruth’s family
looked up to Judge Blount as a man of power and achievement, and they
were horrified at Martin’s outbreak. The remainder of the dinner passed
like a funeral, the judge and Mr. Morse confining their talk to each
other, and the rest of the conversation being extremely desultory. Then
afterward, when Ruth and Martin were alone, there was a scene.

“You are unbearable,” she wept.

But his anger still smouldered, and he kept muttering, “The beasts! The
beasts!”

When she averred he had insulted the judge, he retorted:-

“By telling the truth about him?”

“I don’t care whether it was true or not,” she insisted. “There are
certain bounds of decency, and you had no license to insult anybody.”

“Then where did Judge Blount get the license to assault truth?” Martin
demanded. “Surely to assault truth is a more serious misdemeanor than
to insult a pygmy personality such as the judge’s. He did worse than
that. He blackened the name of a great, noble man who is dead. Oh, the
beasts! The beasts!”

His complex anger flamed afresh, and Ruth was in terror of him. Never
had she seen him so angry, and it was all mystified and unreasonable to
her comprehension. And yet, through her very terror ran the fibres of
fascination that had drawn and that still drew her to him—that had
compelled her to lean towards him, and, in that mad, culminating
moment, lay her hands upon his neck. She was hurt and outraged by what
had taken place, and yet she lay in his arms and quivered while he went
on muttering, “The beasts! The beasts!” And she still lay there when he
said: “I’ll not bother your table again, dear. They do not like me, and
it is wrong of me to thrust my objectionable presence upon them.
Besides, they are just as objectionable to me. Faugh! They are
sickening. And to think of it, I dreamed in my innocence that the
persons who sat in the high places, who lived in fine houses and had
educations and bank accounts, were worth while!”




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


“Come on, let’s go down to the local.”

So spoke Brissenden, faint from a hemorrhage of half an hour before—the
second hemorrhage in three days. The perennial whiskey glass was in his
hands, and he drained it with shaking fingers.

“What do I want with socialism?” Martin demanded.

“Outsiders are allowed five-minute speeches,” the sick man urged. “Get
up and spout. Tell them why you don’t want socialism. Tell them what
you think about them and their ghetto ethics. Slam Nietzsche into them
and get walloped for your pains. Make a scrap of it. It will do them
good. Discussion is what they want, and what you want, too. You see,
I’d like to see you a socialist before I’m gone. It will give you a
sanction for your existence. It is the one thing that will save you in
the time of disappointment that is coming to you.”

“I never can puzzle out why you, of all men, are a socialist,” Martin
pondered. “You detest the crowd so. Surely there is nothing in the
canaille to recommend it to your aesthetic soul.” He pointed an
accusing finger at the whiskey glass which the other was refilling.
“Socialism doesn’t seem to save you.”

“I’m very sick,” was the answer. “With you it is different. You have
health and much to live for, and you must be handcuffed to life
somehow. As for me, you wonder why I am a socialist. I’ll tell you. It
is because Socialism is inevitable; because the present rotten and
irrational system cannot endure; because the day is past for your man
on horseback. The slaves won’t stand for it. They are too many, and
willy-nilly they’ll drag down the would-be equestrian before ever he
gets astride. You can’t get away from them, and you’ll have to swallow
the whole slave-morality. It’s not a nice mess, I’ll allow. But it’s
been a-brewing and swallow it you must. You are antediluvian anyway,
with your Nietzsche ideas. The past is past, and the man who says
history repeats itself is a liar. Of course I don’t like the crowd, but
what’s a poor chap to do? We can’t have the man on horseback, and
anything is preferable to the timid swine that now rule. But come on,
anyway. I’m loaded to the guards now, and if I sit here any longer,
I’ll get drunk. And you know the doctor says—damn the doctor! I’ll fool
him yet.”

It was Sunday night, and they found the small hall packed by the
Oakland socialists, chiefly members of the working class. The speaker,
a clever Jew, won Martin’s admiration at the same time that he aroused
his antagonism. The man’s stooped and narrow shoulders and weazened
chest proclaimed him the true child of the crowded ghetto, and strong
on Martin was the age-long struggle of the feeble, wretched slaves
against the lordly handful of men who had ruled over them and would
rule over them to the end of time. To Martin this withered wisp of a
creature was a symbol. He was the figure that stood forth
representative of the whole miserable mass of weaklings and
inefficients who perished according to biological law on the ragged
confines of life. They were the unfit. In spite of their cunning
philosophy and of their antlike proclivities for coöperation, Nature
rejected them for the exceptional man. Out of the plentiful spawn of
life she flung from her prolific hand she selected only the best. It
was by the same method that men, aping her, bred race-horses and
cucumbers. Doubtless, a creator of a Cosmos could have devised a better
method; but creatures of this particular Cosmos must put up with this
particular method. Of course, they could squirm as they perished, as
the socialists squirmed, as the speaker on the platform and the
perspiring crowd were squirming even now as they counselled together
for some new device with which to minimize the penalties of living and
outwit the Cosmos.

So Martin thought, and so he spoke when Brissenden urged him to give
them hell. He obeyed the mandate, walking up to the platform, as was
the custom, and addressing the chairman. He began in a low voice,
haltingly, forming into order the ideas which had surged in his brain
while the Jew was speaking. In such meetings five minutes was the time
allotted to each speaker; but when Martin’s five minutes were up, he
was in full stride, his attack upon their doctrines but half completed.
He had caught their interest, and the audience urged the chairman by
acclamation to extend Martin’s time. They appreciated him as a foeman
worthy of their intellect, and they listened intently, following every
word. He spoke with fire and conviction, mincing no words in his attack
upon the slaves and their morality and tactics and frankly alluding to
his hearers as the slaves in question. He quoted Spencer and Malthus,
and enunciated the biological law of development.

“And so,” he concluded, in a swift résumé, “no state composed of the
slave-types can endure. The old law of development still holds. In the
struggle for existence, as I have shown, the strong and the progeny of
the strong tend to survive, while the weak and the progeny of the weak
are crushed and tend to perish. The result is that the strong and the
progeny of the strong survive, and, so long as the struggle obtains,
the strength of each generation increases. That is development. But you
slaves—it is too bad to be slaves, I grant—but you slaves dream of a
society where the law of development will be annulled, where no
weaklings and inefficients will perish, where every inefficient will
have as much as he wants to eat as many times a day as he desires, and
where all will marry and have progeny—the weak as well as the strong.
What will be the result? No longer will the strength and life-value of
each generation increase. On the contrary, it will diminish. There is
the Nemesis of your slave philosophy. Your society of slaves—of, by,
and for, slaves—must inevitably weaken and go to pieces as the life
which composes it weakens and goes to pieces.

“Remember, I am enunciating biology and not sentimental ethics. No
state of slaves can stand—”

“How about the United States?” a man yelled from the audience.

“And how about it?” Martin retorted. “The thirteen colonies threw off
their rulers and formed the Republic so-called. The slaves were their
own masters. There were no more masters of the sword. But you couldn’t
get along without masters of some sort, and there arose a new set of
masters—not the great, virile, noble men, but the shrewd and spidery
traders and money-lenders. And they enslaved you over again—but not
frankly, as the true, noble men would do with weight of their own right
arms, but secretly, by spidery machinations and by wheedling and
cajolery and lies. They have purchased your slave judges, they have
debauched your slave legislatures, and they have forced to worse
horrors than chattel slavery your slave boys and girls. Two million of
your children are toiling to-day in this trader-oligarchy of the United
States. Ten millions of you slaves are not properly sheltered nor
properly fed.

“But to return. I have shown that no society of slaves can endure,
because, in its very nature, such society must annul the law of
development. No sooner can a slave society be organized than
deterioration sets in. It is easy for you to talk of annulling the law
of development, but where is the new law of development that will
maintain your strength? Formulate it. Is it already formulated? Then
state it.”

Martin took his seat amidst an uproar of voices. A score of men were on
their feet clamoring for recognition from the chair. And one by one,
encouraged by vociferous applause, speaking with fire and enthusiasm
and excited gestures, they replied to the attack. It was a wild
night—but it was wild intellectually, a battle of ideas. Some strayed
from the point, but most of the speakers replied directly to Martin.
They shook him with lines of thought that were new to him; and gave him
insights, not into new biological laws, but into new applications of
the old laws. They were too earnest to be always polite, and more than
once the chairman rapped and pounded for order.

It chanced that a cub reporter sat in the audience, detailed there on a
day dull of news and impressed by the urgent need of journalism for
sensation. He was not a bright cub reporter. He was merely facile and
glib. He was too dense to follow the discussion. In fact, he had a
comfortable feeling that he was vastly superior to these wordy maniacs
of the working class. Also, he had a great respect for those who sat in
the high places and dictated the policies of nations and newspapers.
Further, he had an ideal, namely, of achieving that excellence of the
perfect reporter who is able to make something—even a great deal—out of
nothing.

He did not know what all the talk was about. It was not necessary.
Words like _revolution_ gave him his cue. Like a paleontologist, able
to reconstruct an entire skeleton from one fossil bone, he was able to
reconstruct a whole speech from the one word _revolution_. He did it
that night, and he did it well; and since Martin had made the biggest
stir, he put it all into his mouth and made him the arch-anarch of the
show, transforming his reactionary individualism into the most lurid,
red-shirt socialist utterance. The cub reporter was an artist, and it
was a large brush with which he laid on the local color—wild-eyed
long-haired men, neurasthenic and degenerate types of men, voices
shaken with passion, clenched fists raised on high, and all projected
against a background of oaths, yells, and the throaty rumbling of angry
men.




CHAPTER XXXIX.


Over the coffee, in his little room, Martin read next morning’s paper.
It was a novel experience to find himself head-lined, on the first page
at that; and he was surprised to learn that he was the most notorious
leader of the Oakland socialists. He ran over the violent speech the
cub reporter had constructed for him, and, though at first he was
angered by the fabrication, in the end he tossed the paper aside with a
laugh.

“Either the man was drunk or criminally malicious,” he said that
afternoon, from his perch on the bed, when Brissenden had arrived and
dropped limply into the one chair.

“But what do you care?” Brissenden asked. “Surely you don’t desire the
approval of the bourgeois swine that read the newspapers?”

Martin thought for a while, then said:-

“No, I really don’t care for their approval, not a whit. On the other
hand, it’s very likely to make my relations with Ruth’s family a trifle
awkward. Her father always contended I was a socialist, and this
miserable stuff will clinch his belief. Not that I care for his
opinion—but what’s the odds? I want to read you what I’ve been doing
to-day. It’s ‘Overdue,’ of course, and I’m just about halfway through.”

He was reading aloud when Maria thrust open the door and ushered in a
young man in a natty suit who glanced briskly about him, noting the
oil-burner and the kitchen in the corner before his gaze wandered on to
Martin.

“Sit down,” Brissenden said.

Martin made room for the young man on the bed and waited for him to
broach his business.

“I heard you speak last night, Mr. Eden, and I’ve come to interview
you,” he began.

Brissenden burst out in a hearty laugh.

“A brother socialist?” the reporter asked, with a quick glance at
Brissenden that appraised the color-value of that cadaverous and dying
man.

“And he wrote that report,” Martin said softly. “Why, he is only a
boy!”

“Why don’t you poke him?” Brissenden asked. “I’d give a thousand
dollars to have my lungs back for five minutes.”

The cub reporter was a trifle perplexed by this talking over him and
around him and at him. But he had been commended for his brilliant
description of the socialist meeting and had further been detailed to
get a personal interview with Martin Eden, the leader of the organized
menace to society.

“You do not object to having your picture taken, Mr. Eden?” he said.
“I’ve a staff photographer outside, you see, and he says it will be
better to take you right away before the sun gets lower. Then we can
have the interview afterward.”

“A photographer,” Brissenden said meditatively. “Poke him, Martin! Poke
him!”

“I guess I’m getting old,” was the answer. “I know I ought, but I
really haven’t the heart. It doesn’t seem to matter.”

“For his mother’s sake,” Brissenden urged.

“It’s worth considering,” Martin replied; “but it doesn’t seem worth
while enough to rouse sufficient energy in me. You see, it does take
energy to give a fellow a poking. Besides, what does it matter?”

“That’s right—that’s the way to take it,” the cub announced airily,
though he had already begun to glance anxiously at the door.

“But it wasn’t true, not a word of what he wrote,” Martin went on,
confining his attention to Brissenden.

“It was just in a general way a description, you understand,” the cub
ventured, “and besides, it’s good advertising. That’s what counts. It
was a favor to you.”

“It’s good advertising, Martin, old boy,” Brissenden repeated solemnly.

“And it was a favor to me—think of that!” was Martin’s contribution.

“Let me see—where were you born, Mr. Eden?” the cub asked, assuming an
air of expectant attention.

“He doesn’t take notes,” said Brissenden. “He remembers it all.”

“That is sufficient for me.” The cub was trying not to look worried.
“No decent reporter needs to bother with notes.”

“That was sufficient—for last night.” But Brissenden was not a disciple
of quietism, and he changed his attitude abruptly. “Martin, if you
don’t poke him, I’ll do it myself, if I fall dead on the floor the next
moment.”

“How will a spanking do?” Martin asked.

Brissenden considered judicially, and nodded his head.

The next instant Martin was seated on the edge of the bed with the cub
face downward across his knees.

“Now don’t bite,” Martin warned, “or else I’ll have to punch your face.
It would be a pity, for it is such a pretty face.”

His uplifted hand descended, and thereafter rose and fell in a swift
and steady rhythm. The cub struggled and cursed and squirmed, but did
not offer to bite. Brissenden looked on gravely, though once he grew
excited and gripped the whiskey bottle, pleading, “Here, just let me
swat him once.”

“Sorry my hand played out,” Martin said, when at last he desisted. “It
is quite numb.”

He uprighted the cub and perched him on the bed.

“I’ll have you arrested for this,” he snarled, tears of boyish
indignation running down his flushed cheeks. “I’ll make you sweat for
this. You’ll see.”

“The pretty thing,” Martin remarked. “He doesn’t realize that he has
entered upon the downward path. It is not honest, it is not square, it
is not manly, to tell lies about one’s fellow-creatures the way he has
done, and he doesn’t know it.”

“He has to come to us to be told,” Brissenden filled in a pause.

“Yes, to me whom he has maligned and injured. My grocery will
undoubtedly refuse me credit now. The worst of it is that the poor boy
will keep on this way until he deteriorates into a first-class
newspaper man and also a first-class scoundrel.”

“But there is yet time,” quoth Brissenden. “Who knows but what you may
prove the humble instrument to save him. Why didn’t you let me swat him
just once? I’d like to have had a hand in it.”

“I’ll have you arrested, the pair of you, you b-b-big brutes,” sobbed
the erring soul.

“No, his mouth is too pretty and too weak.” Martin shook his head
lugubriously. “I’m afraid I’ve numbed my hand in vain. The young man
cannot reform. He will become eventually a very great and successful
newspaper man. He has no conscience. That alone will make him great.”

With that the cub passed out the door in trepidation to the last for
fear that Brissenden would hit him in the back with the bottle he still
clutched.

In the next morning’s paper Martin learned a great deal more about
himself that was new to him. “We are the sworn enemies of society,” he
found himself quoted as saying in a column interview. “No, we are not
anarchists but socialists.” When the reporter pointed out to him that
there seemed little difference between the two schools, Martin had
shrugged his shoulders in silent affirmation. His face was described as
bilaterally asymmetrical, and various other signs of degeneration were
described. Especially notable were his thuglike hands and the fiery
gleams in his blood-shot eyes.

He learned, also, that he spoke nightly to the workmen in the City Hall
Park, and that among the anarchists and agitators that there inflamed
the minds of the people he drew the largest audiences and made the most
revolutionary speeches. The cub painted a high-light picture of his
poor little room, its oil-stove and the one chair, and of the
death’s-head tramp who kept him company and who looked as if he had
just emerged from twenty years of solitary confinement in some fortress
dungeon.

The cub had been industrious. He had scurried around and nosed out
Martin’s family history, and procured a photograph of Higginbotham’s
Cash Store with Bernard Higginbotham himself standing out in front.
That gentleman was depicted as an intelligent, dignified businessman
who had no patience with his brother-in-law’s socialistic views, and no
patience with the brother-in-law, either, whom he was quoted as
characterizing as a lazy good-for-nothing who wouldn’t take a job when
it was offered to him and who would go to jail yet. Hermann von
Schmidt, Marian’s husband, had likewise been interviewed. He had called
Martin the black sheep of the family and repudiated him. “He tried to
sponge off of me, but I put a stop to that good and quick,” Von Schmidt
had said to the reporter. “He knows better than to come bumming around
here. A man who won’t work is no good, take that from me.”

This time Martin was genuinely angry. Brissenden looked upon the affair
as a good joke, but he could not console Martin, who knew that it would
be no easy task to explain to Ruth. As for her father, he knew that he
must be overjoyed with what had happened and that he would make the
most of it to break off the engagement. How much he would make of it he
was soon to realize. The afternoon mail brought a letter from Ruth.
Martin opened it with a premonition of disaster, and read it standing
at the open door when he had received it from the postman. As he read,
mechanically his hand sought his pocket for the tobacco and brown paper
of his old cigarette days. He was not aware that the pocket was empty
or that he had even reached for the materials with which to roll a
cigarette.

It was not a passionate letter. There were no touches of anger in it.
But all the way through, from the first sentence to the last, was
sounded the note of hurt and disappointment. She had expected better of
him. She had thought he had got over his youthful wildness, that her
love for him had been sufficiently worth while to enable him to live
seriously and decently. And now her father and mother had taken a firm
stand and commanded that the engagement be broken. That they were
justified in this she could not but admit. Their relation could never
be a happy one. It had been unfortunate from the first. But one regret
she voiced in the whole letter, and it was a bitter one to Martin. “If
only you had settled down to some position and attempted to make
something of yourself,” she wrote. “But it was not to be. Your past
life had been too wild and irregular. I can understand that you are not
to be blamed. You could act only according to your nature and your
early training. So I do not blame you, Martin. Please remember that. It
was simply a mistake. As father and mother have contended, we were not
made for each other, and we should both be happy because it was
discovered not too late.” . . “There is no use trying to see me,” she
said toward the last. “It would be an unhappy meeting for both of us,
as well as for my mother. I feel, as it is, that I have caused her
great pain and worry. I shall have to do much living to atone for it.”

He read it through to the end, carefully, a second time, then sat down
and replied. He outlined the remarks he had uttered at the socialist
meeting, pointing out that they were in all ways the converse of what
the newspaper had put in his mouth. Toward the end of the letter he was
God’s own lover pleading passionately for love. “Please answer,” he
said, “and in your answer you have to tell me but one thing. Do you
love me? That is all—the answer to that one question.”

But no answer came the next day, nor the next. “Overdue” lay untouched
upon the table, and each day the heap of returned manuscripts under the
table grew larger. For the first time Martin’s glorious sleep was
interrupted by insomnia, and he tossed through long, restless nights.
Three times he called at the Morse home, but was turned away by the
servant who answered the bell. Brissenden lay sick in his hotel, too
feeble to stir out, and, though Martin was with him often, he did not
worry him with his troubles.

For Martin’s troubles were many. The aftermath of the cub reporter’s
deed was even wider than Martin had anticipated. The Portuguese grocer
refused him further credit, while the greengrocer, who was an American
and proud of it, had called him a traitor to his country and refused
further dealings with him—carrying his patriotism to such a degree that
he cancelled Martin’s account and forbade him ever to attempt to pay
it. The talk in the neighborhood reflected the same feeling, and
indignation against Martin ran high. No one would have anything to do
with a socialist traitor. Poor Maria was dubious and frightened, but
she remained loyal. The children of the neighborhood recovered from the
awe of the grand carriage which once had visited Martin, and from safe
distances they called him “hobo” and “bum.” The Silva tribe, however,
stanchly defended him, fighting more than one pitched battle for his
honor, and black eyes and bloody noses became quite the order of the
day and added to Maria’s perplexities and troubles.

Once, Martin met Gertrude on the street, down in Oakland, and learned
what he knew could not be otherwise—that Bernard Higginbotham was
furious with him for having dragged the family into public disgrace,
and that he had forbidden him the house.

“Why don’t you go away, Martin?” Gertrude had begged. “Go away and get
a job somewhere and steady down. Afterwards, when this all blows over,
you can come back.”

Martin shook his head, but gave no explanations. How could he explain?
He was appalled at the awful intellectual chasm that yawned between him
and his people. He could never cross it and explain to them his
position,—the Nietzschean position, in regard to socialism. There were
not words enough in the English language, nor in any language, to make
his attitude and conduct intelligible to them. Their highest concept of
right conduct, in his case, was to get a job. That was their first word
and their last. It constituted their whole lexicon of ideas. Get a job!
Go to work! Poor, stupid slaves, he thought, while his sister talked.
Small wonder the world belonged to the strong. The slaves were obsessed
by their own slavery. A job was to them a golden fetich before which
they fell down and worshipped.

He shook his head again, when Gertrude offered him money, though he
knew that within the day he would have to make a trip to the
pawnbroker.

“Don’t come near Bernard now,” she admonished him. “After a few months,
when he is cooled down, if you want to, you can get the job of drivin’
delivery-wagon for him. Any time you want me, just send for me an’ I’ll
come. Don’t forget.”

She went away weeping audibly, and he felt a pang of sorrow shoot
through him at sight of her heavy body and uncouth gait. As he watched
her go, the Nietzschean edifice seemed to shake and totter. The
slave-class in the abstract was all very well, but it was not wholly
satisfactory when it was brought home to his own family. And yet, if
there was ever a slave trampled by the strong, that slave was his
sister Gertrude. He grinned savagely at the paradox. A fine
Nietzsche-man he was, to allow his intellectual concepts to be shaken
by the first sentiment or emotion that strayed along—ay, to be shaken
by the slave-morality itself, for that was what his pity for his sister
really was. The true noble men were above pity and compassion. Pity and
compassion had been generated in the subterranean barracoons of the
slaves and were no more than the agony and sweat of the crowded
miserables and weaklings.




CHAPTER XL.


“Overdue” still continued to lie forgotten on the table. Every
manuscript that he had had out now lay under the table. Only one
manuscript he kept going, and that was Brissenden’s “Ephemera.” His
bicycle and black suit were again in pawn, and the type-writer people
were once more worrying about the rent. But such things no longer
bothered him. He was seeking a new orientation, and until that was
found his life must stand still.

After several weeks, what he had been waiting for happened. He met Ruth
on the street. It was true, she was accompanied by her brother, Norman,
and it was true that they tried to ignore him and that Norman attempted
to wave him aside.

“If you interfere with my sister, I’ll call an officer,” Norman
threatened. “She does not wish to speak with you, and your insistence
is insult.”

“If you persist, you’ll have to call that officer, and then you’ll get
your name in the papers,” Martin answered grimly. “And now, get out of
my way and get the officer if you want to. I’m going to talk with
Ruth.”

“I want to have it from your own lips,” he said to her.

She was pale and trembling, but she held up and looked inquiringly.

“The question I asked in my letter,” he prompted.

Norman made an impatient movement, but Martin checked him with a swift
look.

She shook her head.

“Is all this of your own free will?” he demanded.

“It is.” She spoke in a low, firm voice and with deliberation. “It is
of my own free will. You have disgraced me so that I am ashamed to meet
my friends. They are all talking about me, I know. That is all I can
tell you. You have made me very unhappy, and I never wish to see you
again.”

“Friends! Gossip! Newspaper misreports! Surely such things are not
stronger than love! I can only believe that you never loved me.”

A blush drove the pallor from her face.

“After what has passed?” she said faintly. “Martin, you do not know
what you are saying. I am not common.”

“You see, she doesn’t want to have anything to do with you,” Norman
blurted out, starting on with her.

Martin stood aside and let them pass, fumbling unconsciously in his
coat pocket for the tobacco and brown papers that were not there.

It was a long walk to North Oakland, but it was not until he went up
the steps and entered his room that he knew he had walked it. He found
himself sitting on the edge of the bed and staring about him like an
awakened somnambulist. He noticed “Overdue” lying on the table and drew
up his chair and reached for his pen. There was in his nature a logical
compulsion toward completeness. Here was something undone. It had been
deferred against the completion of something else. Now that something
else had been finished, and he would apply himself to this task until
it was finished. What he would do next he did not know. All that he did
know was that a climacteric in his life had been attained. A period had
been reached, and he was rounding it off in workman-like fashion. He
was not curious about the future. He would soon enough find out what it
held in store for him. Whatever it was, it did not matter. Nothing
seemed to matter.

For five days he toiled on at “Overdue,” going nowhere, seeing nobody,
and eating meagrely. On the morning of the sixth day the postman
brought him a thin letter from the editor of _The Parthenon_. A glance
told him that “Ephemera” was accepted. “We have submitted the poem to
Mr. Cartwright Bruce,” the editor went on to say, “and he has reported
so favorably upon it that we cannot let it go. As an earnest of our
pleasure in publishing the poem, let me tell you that we have set it
for the August number, our July number being already made up. Kindly
extend our pleasure and our thanks to Mr. Brissenden. Please send by
return mail his photograph and biographical data. If our honorarium is
unsatisfactory, kindly telegraph us at once and state what you consider
a fair price.”

Since the honorarium they had offered was three hundred and fifty
dollars, Martin thought it not worth while to telegraph. Then, too,
there was Brissenden’s consent to be gained. Well, he had been right,
after all. Here was one magazine editor who knew real poetry when he
saw it. And the price was splendid, even though it was for the poem of
a century. As for Cartwright Bruce, Martin knew that he was the one
critic for whose opinions Brissenden had any respect.

Martin rode down town on an electric car, and as he watched the houses
and cross-streets slipping by he was aware of a regret that he was not
more elated over his friend’s success and over his own signal victory.
The one critic in the United States had pronounced favorably on the
poem, while his own contention that good stuff could find its way into
the magazines had proved correct. But enthusiasm had lost its spring in
him, and he found that he was more anxious to see Brissenden than he
was to carry the good news. The acceptance of _The Parthenon_ had
recalled to him that during his five days’ devotion to “Overdue” he had
not heard from Brissenden nor even thought about him. For the first
time Martin realized the daze he had been in, and he felt shame for
having forgotten his friend. But even the shame did not burn very
sharply. He was numb to emotions of any sort save the artistic ones
concerned in the writing of “Overdue.” So far as other affairs were
concerned, he had been in a trance. For that matter, he was still in a
trance. All this life through which the electric car whirred seemed
remote and unreal, and he would have experienced little interest and
less shock if the great stone steeple of the church he passed had
suddenly crumbled to mortar-dust upon his head.

At the hotel he hurried up to Brissenden’s room, and hurried down
again. The room was empty. All luggage was gone.

“Did Mr. Brissenden leave any address?” he asked the clerk, who looked
at him curiously for a moment.

“Haven’t you heard?” he asked.

Martin shook his head.

“Why, the papers were full of it. He was found dead in bed. Suicide.
Shot himself through the head.”

“Is he buried yet?” Martin seemed to hear his voice, like some one
else’s voice, from a long way off, asking the question.

“No. The body was shipped East after the inquest. Lawyers engaged by
his people saw to the arrangements.”

“They were quick about it, I must say,” Martin commented.

“Oh, I don’t know. It happened five days ago.”

“Five days ago?”

“Yes, five days ago.”

“Oh,” Martin said as he turned and went out.

At the corner he stepped into the Western Union and sent a telegram to
_The Parthenon_, advising them to proceed with the publication of the
poem. He had in his pocket but five cents with which to pay his carfare
home, so he sent the message collect.

Once in his room, he resumed his writing. The days and nights came and
went, and he sat at his table and wrote on. He went nowhere, save to
the pawnbroker, took no exercise, and ate methodically when he was
hungry and had something to cook, and just as methodically went without
when he had nothing to cook. Composed as the story was, in advance,
chapter by chapter, he nevertheless saw and developed an opening that
increased the power of it, though it necessitated twenty thousand
additional words. It was not that there was any vital need that the
thing should be well done, but that his artistic canons compelled him
to do it well. He worked on in the daze, strangely detached from the
world around him, feeling like a familiar ghost among these literary
trappings of his former life. He remembered that some one had said that
a ghost was the spirit of a man who was dead and who did not have sense
enough to know it; and he paused for the moment to wonder if he were
really dead and unaware of it.

Came the day when “Overdue” was finished. The agent of the type-writer
firm had come for the machine, and he sat on the bed while Martin, on
the one chair, typed the last pages of the final chapter. “Finis,” he
wrote, in capitals, at the end, and to him it was indeed finis. He
watched the type-writer carried out the door with a feeling of relief,
then went over and lay down on the bed. He was faint from hunger. Food
had not passed his lips in thirty-six hours, but he did not think about
it. He lay on his back, with closed eyes, and did not think at all,
while the daze or stupor slowly welled up, saturating his
consciousness. Half in delirium, he began muttering aloud the lines of
an anonymous poem Brissenden had been fond of quoting to him. Maria,
listening anxiously outside his door, was perturbed by his monotonous
utterance. The words in themselves were not significant to her, but the
fact that he was saying them was. “I have done,” was the burden of the
poem.

“‘I have done—
Put by the lute.
Song and singing soon are over
As the airy shades that hover
In among the purple clover.
I have done—
Put by the lute.
Once I sang as early thrushes
Sing among the dewy bushes;
Now I’m mute.
I am like a weary linnet,
For my throat has no song in it;
I have had my singing minute.
I have done.
Put by the lute.’”


Maria could stand it no longer, and hurried away to the stove, where
she filled a quart-bowl with soup, putting into it the lion’s share of
chopped meat and vegetables which her ladle scraped from the bottom of
the pot. Martin roused himself and sat up and began to eat, between
spoonfuls reassuring Maria that he had not been talking in his sleep
and that he did not have any fever.

After she left him he sat drearily, with drooping shoulders, on the
edge of the bed, gazing about him with lack-lustre eyes that saw
nothing until the torn wrapper of a magazine, which had come in the
morning’s mail and which lay unopened, shot a gleam of light into his
darkened brain. It is _The Parthenon_, he thought, the August
_Parthenon_, and it must contain “Ephemera.” If only Brissenden were
here to see!

He was turning the pages of the magazine, when suddenly he stopped.
“Ephemera” had been featured, with gorgeous head-piece and
Beardsley-like margin decorations. On one side of the head-piece was
Brissenden’s photograph, on the other side was the photograph of Sir
John Value, the British Ambassador. A preliminary editorial note quoted
Sir John Value as saying that there were no poets in America, and the
publication of “Ephemera” was _The Parthenon’s_. “There, take that, Sir
John Value!” Cartwright Bruce was described as the greatest critic in
America, and he was quoted as saying that “Ephemera” was the greatest
poem ever written in America. And finally, the editor’s foreword ended
with: “We have not yet made up our minds entirely as to the merits of
“Ephemera”; perhaps we shall never be able to do so. But we have read
it often, wondering at the words and their arrangement, wondering where
Mr. Brissenden got them, and how he could fasten them together.” Then
followed the poem.

“Pretty good thing you died, Briss, old man,” Martin murmured, letting
the magazine slip between his knees to the floor.

The cheapness and vulgarity of it was nauseating, and Martin noted
apathetically that he was not nauseated very much. He wished he could
get angry, but did not have energy enough to try. He was too numb. His
blood was too congealed to accelerate to the swift tidal flow of
indignation. After all, what did it matter? It was on a par with all
the rest that Brissenden had condemned in bourgeois society.

“Poor Briss,” Martin communed; “he would never have forgiven me.”

Rousing himself with an effort, he possessed himself of a box which had
once contained type-writer paper. Going through its contents, he drew
forth eleven poems which his friend had written. These he tore
lengthwise and crosswise and dropped into the waste basket. He did it
languidly, and, when he had finished, sat on the edge of the bed
staring blankly before him.

How long he sat there he did not know, until, suddenly, across his
sightless vision he saw form a long horizontal line of white. It was
curious. But as he watched it grow in definiteness he saw that it was a
coral reef smoking in the white Pacific surges. Next, in the line of
breakers he made out a small canoe, an outrigger canoe. In the stern he
saw a young bronzed god in scarlet hip-cloth dipping a flashing paddle.
He recognized him. He was Moti, the youngest son of Tati, the chief,
and this was Tahiti, and beyond that smoking reef lay the sweet land of
Papara and the chief’s grass house by the river’s mouth. It was the end
of the day, and Moti was coming home from the fishing. He was waiting
for the rush of a big breaker whereon to jump the reef. Then he saw
himself, sitting forward in the canoe as he had often sat in the past,
dipping a paddle that waited Moti’s word to dig in like mad when the
turquoise wall of the great breaker rose behind them. Next, he was no
longer an onlooker but was himself in the canoe, Moti was crying out,
they were both thrusting hard with their paddles, racing on the steep
face of the flying turquoise. Under the bow the water was hissing as
from a steam jet, the air was filled with driven spray, there was a
rush and rumble and long-echoing roar, and the canoe floated on the
placid water of the lagoon. Moti laughed and shook the salt water from
his eyes, and together they paddled in to the pounded-coral beach where
Tati’s grass walls through the cocoanut-palms showed golden in the
setting sun.

The picture faded, and before his eyes stretched the disorder of his
squalid room. He strove in vain to see Tahiti again. He knew there was
singing among the trees and that the maidens were dancing in the
moonlight, but he could not see them. He could see only the littered
writing-table, the empty space where the type-writer had stood, and the
unwashed window-pane. He closed his eyes with a groan, and slept.




CHAPTER XLI.


He slept heavily all night, and did not stir until aroused by the
postman on his morning round. Martin felt tired and passive, and went
through his letters aimlessly. One thin envelope, from a robber
magazine, contained a check for twenty-two dollars. He had been dunning
for it for a year and a half. He noted its amount apathetically. The
old-time thrill at receiving a publisher’s check was gone. Unlike his
earlier checks, this one was not pregnant with promise of great things
to come. To him it was a check for twenty-two dollars, that was all,
and it would buy him something to eat.

Another check was in the same mail, sent from a New York weekly in
payment for some humorous verse which had been accepted months before.
It was for ten dollars. An idea came to him, which he calmly
considered. He did not know what he was going to do, and he felt in no
hurry to do anything. In the meantime he must live. Also he owed
numerous debts. Would it not be a paying investment to put stamps on
the huge pile of manuscripts under the table and start them on their
travels again? One or two of them might be accepted. That would help
him to live. He decided on the investment, and, after he had cashed the
checks at the bank down in Oakland, he bought ten dollars’ worth of
postage stamps. The thought of going home to cook breakfast in his
stuffy little room was repulsive to him. For the first time he refused
to consider his debts. He knew that in his room he could manufacture a
substantial breakfast at a cost of from fifteen to twenty cents. But,
instead, he went into the Forum Café and ordered a breakfast that cost
two dollars. He tipped the waiter a quarter, and spent fifty cents for
a package of Egyptian cigarettes. It was the first time he had smoked
since Ruth had asked him to stop. But he could see now no reason why he
should not, and besides, he wanted to smoke. And what did the money
matter? For five cents he could have bought a package of Durham and
brown papers and rolled forty cigarettes—but what of it? Money had no
meaning to him now except what it would immediately buy. He was
chartless and rudderless, and he had no port to make, while drifting
involved the least living, and it was living that hurt.

The days slipped along, and he slept eight hours regularly every night.
Though now, while waiting for more checks, he ate in the Japanese
restaurants where meals were served for ten cents, his wasted body
filled out, as did the hollows in his cheeks. He no longer abused
himself with short sleep, overwork, and overstudy. He wrote nothing,
and the books were closed. He walked much, out in the hills, and loafed
long hours in the quiet parks. He had no friends nor acquaintances, nor
did he make any. He had no inclination. He was waiting for some
impulse, from he knew not where, to put his stopped life into motion
again. In the meantime his life remained run down, planless, and empty
and idle.

Once he made a trip to San Francisco to look up the “real dirt.” But at
the last moment, as he stepped into the upstairs entrance, he recoiled
and turned and fled through the swarming ghetto. He was frightened at
the thought of hearing philosophy discussed, and he fled furtively, for
fear that some one of the “real dirt” might chance along and recognize
him.

Sometimes he glanced over the magazines and newspapers to see how
“Ephemera” was being maltreated. It had made a hit. But what a hit!
Everybody had read it, and everybody was discussing whether or not it
was really poetry. The local papers had taken it up, and daily there
appeared columns of learned criticisms, facetious editorials, and
serious letters from subscribers. Helen Della Delmar (proclaimed with a
flourish of trumpets and rolling of tomtoms to be the greatest woman
poet in the United States) denied Brissenden a seat beside her on
Pegasus and wrote voluminous letters to the public, proving that he was
no poet.

_The Parthenon_ came out in its next number patting itself on the back
for the stir it had made, sneering at Sir John Value, and exploiting
Brissenden’s death with ruthless commercialism. A newspaper with a
sworn circulation of half a million published an original and
spontaneous poem by Helen Della Delmar, in which she gibed and sneered
at Brissenden. Also, she was guilty of a second poem, in which she
parodied him.

Martin had many times to be glad that Brissenden was dead. He had hated
the crowd so, and here all that was finest and most sacred of him had
been thrown to the crowd. Daily the vivisection of Beauty went on.
Every nincompoop in the land rushed into free print, floating their
wizened little egos into the public eye on the surge of Brissenden’s
greatness. Quoth one paper: “We have received a letter from a gentleman
who wrote a poem just like it, only better, some time ago.” Another
paper, in deadly seriousness, reproving Helen Della Delmar for her
parody, said: “But unquestionably Miss Delmar wrote it in a moment of
badinage and not quite with the respect that one great poet should show
to another and perhaps to the greatest. However, whether Miss Delmar be
jealous or not of the man who invented ‘Ephemera,’ it is certain that
she, like thousands of others, is fascinated by his work, and that the
day may come when she will try to write lines like his.”

Ministers began to preach sermons against “Ephemera,” and one, who too
stoutly stood for much of its content, was expelled for heresy. The
great poem contributed to the gayety of the world. The comic
verse-writers and the cartoonists took hold of it with screaming
laughter, and in the personal columns of society weeklies jokes were
perpetrated on it to the effect that Charley Frensham told Archie
Jennings, in confidence, that five lines of “Ephemera” would drive a
man to beat a cripple, and that ten lines would send him to the bottom
of the river.

Martin did not laugh; nor did he grit his teeth in anger. The effect
produced upon him was one of great sadness. In the crash of his whole
world, with love on the pinnacle, the crash of magazinedom and the dear
public was a small crash indeed. Brissenden had been wholly right in
his judgment of the magazines, and he, Martin, had spent arduous and
futile years in order to find it out for himself. The magazines were
all Brissenden had said they were and more. Well, he was done, he
solaced himself. He had hitched his wagon to a star and been landed in
a pestiferous marsh. The visions of Tahiti—clean, sweet Tahiti—were
coming to him more frequently. And there were the low Paumotus, and the
high Marquesas; he saw himself often, now, on board trading schooners
or frail little cutters, slipping out at dawn through the reef at
Papeete and beginning the long beat through the pearl-atolls to
Nukahiva and the Bay of Taiohae, where Tamari, he knew, would kill a
pig in honor of his coming, and where Tamari’s flower-garlanded
daughters would seize his hands and with song and laughter garland him
with flowers. The South Seas were calling, and he knew that sooner or
later he would answer the call.

In the meantime he drifted, resting and recuperating after the long
traverse he had made through the realm of knowledge. When _The
Parthenon_ check of three hundred and fifty dollars was forwarded to
him, he turned it over to the local lawyer who had attended to
Brissenden’s affairs for his family. Martin took a receipt for the
check, and at the same time gave a note for the hundred dollars
Brissenden had let him have.

The time was not long when Martin ceased patronizing the Japanese
restaurants. At the very moment when he had abandoned the fight, the
tide turned. But it had turned too late. Without a thrill he opened a
thick envelope from _The Millennium_, scanned the face of a check that
represented three hundred dollars, and noted that it was the payment on
acceptance for “Adventure.” Every debt he owed in the world, including
the pawnshop, with its usurious interest, amounted to less than a
hundred dollars. And when he had paid everything, and lifted the
hundred-dollar note with Brissenden’s lawyer, he still had over a
hundred dollars in pocket. He ordered a suit of clothes from the tailor
and ate his meals in the best cafés in town. He still slept in his
little room at Maria’s, but the sight of his new clothes caused the
neighborhood children to cease from calling him “hobo” and “tramp” from
the roofs of woodsheds and over back fences.

“Wiki-Wiki,” his Hawaiian short story, was bought by _Warren’s Monthly_
for two hundred and fifty dollars. _The Northern Review_ took his
essay, “The Cradle of Beauty,” and _Mackintosh’s Magazine_ took “The
Palmist”—the poem he had written to Marian. The editors and readers
were back from their summer vacations, and manuscripts were being
handled quickly. But Martin could not puzzle out what strange whim
animated them to this general acceptance of the things they had
persistently rejected for two years. Nothing of his had been published.
He was not known anywhere outside of Oakland, and in Oakland, with the
few who thought they knew him, he was notorious as a red-shirt and a
socialist. So there was no explaining this sudden acceptability of his
wares. It was sheer jugglery of fate.

After it had been refused by a number of magazines, he had taken
Brissenden’s rejected advice and started “The Shame of the Sun” on the
round of publishers. After several refusals, Singletree, Darnley & Co.
accepted it, promising fall publication. When Martin asked for an
advance on royalties, they wrote that such was not their custom, that
books of that nature rarely paid for themselves, and that they doubted
if his book would sell a thousand copies. Martin figured what the book
would earn him on such a sale. Retailed at a dollar, on a royalty of
fifteen per cent, it would bring him one hundred and fifty dollars. He
decided that if he had it to do over again he would confine himself to
fiction. “Adventure,” one-fourth as long, had brought him twice as much
from _The Millennium_. That newspaper paragraph he had read so long ago
had been true, after all. The first-class magazines did not pay on
acceptance, and they paid well. Not two cents a word, but four cents a
word, had _The Millennium_ paid him. And, furthermore, they bought good
stuff, too, for were they not buying his? This last thought he
accompanied with a grin.

He wrote to Singletree, Darnley & Co., offering to sell out his rights
in “The Shame of the Sun” for a hundred dollars, but they did not care
to take the risk. In the meantime he was not in need of money, for
several of his later stories had been accepted and paid for. He
actually opened a bank account, where, without a debt in the world, he
had several hundred dollars to his credit. “Overdue,” after having been
declined by a number of magazines, came to rest at the Meredith-Lowell
Company. Martin remembered the five dollars Gertrude had given him, and
his resolve to return it to her a hundred times over; so he wrote for
an advance on royalties of five hundred dollars. To his surprise a
check for that amount, accompanied by a contract, came by return mail.
He cashed the check into five-dollar gold pieces and telephoned
Gertrude that he wanted to see her.

She arrived at the house panting and short of breath from the haste she
had made. Apprehensive of trouble, she had stuffed the few dollars she
possessed into her hand-satchel; and so sure was she that disaster had
overtaken her brother, that she stumbled forward, sobbing, into his
arms, at the same time thrusting the satchel mutely at him.

“I’d have come myself,” he said. “But I didn’t want a row with Mr.
Higginbotham, and that is what would have surely happened.”

“He’ll be all right after a time,” she assured him, while she wondered
what the trouble was that Martin was in. “But you’d best get a job
first an’ steady down. Bernard does like to see a man at honest work.
That stuff in the newspapers broke ’m all up. I never saw ’m so mad
before.”

“I’m not going to get a job,” Martin said with a smile. “And you can
tell him so from me. I don’t need a job, and there’s the proof of it.”

He emptied the hundred gold pieces into her lap in a glinting, tinkling
stream.

“You remember that fiver you gave me the time I didn’t have carfare?
Well, there it is, with ninety-nine brothers of different ages but all
of the same size.”

If Gertrude had been frightened when she arrived, she was now in a
panic of fear. Her fear was such that it was certitude. She was not
suspicious. She was convinced. She looked at Martin in horror, and her
heavy limbs shrank under the golden stream as though it were burning
her.

“It’s yours,” he laughed.

She burst into tears, and began to moan, “My poor boy, my poor boy!”

He was puzzled for a moment. Then he divined the cause of her agitation
and handed her the Meredith-Lowell letter which had accompanied the
check. She stumbled through it, pausing now and again to wipe her eyes,
and when she had finished, said:-

“An’ does it mean that you come by the money honestly?”

“More honestly than if I’d won it in a lottery. I earned it.”

Slowly faith came back to her, and she reread the letter carefully. It
took him long to explain to her the nature of the transaction which had
put the money into his possession, and longer still to get her to
understand that the money was really hers and that he did not need it.

“I’ll put it in the bank for you,” she said finally.

“You’ll do nothing of the sort. It’s yours, to do with as you please,
and if you won’t take it, I’ll give it to Maria. She’ll know what to do
with it. I’d suggest, though, that you hire a servant and take a good
long rest.”

“I’m goin’ to tell Bernard all about it,” she announced, when she was
leaving.

Martin winced, then grinned.

“Yes, do,” he said. “And then, maybe, he’ll invite me to dinner again.”

“Yes, he will—I’m sure he will!” she exclaimed fervently, as she drew
him to her and kissed and hugged him.




CHAPTER XLII.


One day Martin became aware that he was lonely. He was healthy and
strong, and had nothing to do. The cessation from writing and studying,
the death of Brissenden, and the estrangement from Ruth had made a big
hole in his life; and his life refused to be pinned down to good living
in cafés and the smoking of Egyptian cigarettes. It was true the South
Seas were calling to him, but he had a feeling that the game was not
yet played out in the United States. Two books were soon to be
published, and he had more books that might find publication. Money
could be made out of them, and he would wait and take a sackful of it
into the South Seas. He knew a valley and a bay in the Marquesas that
he could buy for a thousand Chili dollars. The valley ran from the
horseshoe, land-locked bay to the tops of the dizzy, cloud-capped peaks
and contained perhaps ten thousand acres. It was filled with tropical
fruits, wild chickens, and wild pigs, with an occasional herd of wild
cattle, while high up among the peaks were herds of wild goats harried
by packs of wild dogs. The whole place was wild. Not a human lived in
it. And he could buy it and the bay for a thousand Chili dollars.

The bay, as he remembered it, was magnificent, with water deep enough
to accommodate the largest vessel afloat, and so safe that the South
Pacific Directory recommended it as the best careening place for ships
for hundreds of miles around. He would buy a schooner—one of those
yacht-like, coppered crafts that sailed like witches—and go trading
copra and pearling among the islands. He would make the valley and the
bay his headquarters. He would build a patriarchal grass house like
Tati’s, and have it and the valley and the schooner filled with
dark-skinned servitors. He would entertain there the factor of Taiohae,
captains of wandering traders, and all the best of the South Pacific
riffraff. He would keep open house and entertain like a prince. And he
would forget the books he had opened and the world that had proved an
illusion.

To do all this he must wait in California to fill the sack with money.
Already it was beginning to flow in. If one of the books made a strike,
it might enable him to sell the whole heap of manuscripts. Also he
could collect the stories and the poems into books, and make sure of
the valley and the bay and the schooner. He would never write again.
Upon that he was resolved. But in the meantime, awaiting the
publication of the books, he must do something more than live dazed and
stupid in the sort of uncaring trance into which he had fallen.

He noted, one Sunday morning, that the Bricklayers’ Picnic took place
that day at Shell Mound Park, and to Shell Mound Park he went. He had
been to the working-class picnics too often in his earlier life not to
know what they were like, and as he entered the park he experienced a
recrudescence of all the old sensations. After all, they were his kind,
these working people. He had been born among them, he had lived among
them, and though he had strayed for a time, it was well to come back
among them.

“If it ain’t Mart!” he heard some one say, and the next moment a hearty
hand was on his shoulder. “Where you ben all the time? Off to sea? Come
on an’ have a drink.”

It was the old crowd in which he found himself—the old crowd, with here
and there a gap, and here and there a new face. The fellows were not
bricklayers, but, as in the old days, they attended all Sunday picnics
for the dancing, and the fighting, and the fun. Martin drank with them,
and began to feel really human once more. He was a fool to have ever
left them, he thought; and he was very certain that his sum of
happiness would have been greater had he remained with them and let
alone the books and the people who sat in the high places. Yet the beer
seemed not so good as of yore. It didn’t taste as it used to taste.
Brissenden had spoiled him for steam beer, he concluded, and wondered
if, after all, the books had spoiled him for companionship with these
friends of his youth. He resolved that he would not be so spoiled, and
he went on to the dancing pavilion. Jimmy, the plumber, he met there,
in the company of a tall, blond girl who promptly forsook him for
Martin.

“Gee, it’s like old times,” Jimmy explained to the gang that gave him
the laugh as Martin and the blonde whirled away in a waltz. “An’ I
don’t give a rap. I’m too damned glad to see ’m back. Watch ’m waltz,
eh? It’s like silk. Who’d blame any girl?”

But Martin restored the blonde to Jimmy, and the three of them, with
half a dozen friends, watched the revolving couples and laughed and
joked with one another. Everybody was glad to see Martin back. No book
of his been published; he carried no fictitious value in their eyes.
They liked him for himself. He felt like a prince returned from excile,
and his lonely heart burgeoned in the geniality in which it bathed. He
made a mad day of it, and was at his best. Also, he had money in his
pockets, and, as in the old days when he returned from sea with a
pay-day, he made the money fly.

Once, on the dancing-floor, he saw Lizzie Connolly go by in the arms of
a young workingman; and, later, when he made the round of the pavilion,
he came upon her sitting by a refreshment table. Surprise and greetings
over, he led her away into the grounds, where they could talk without
shouting down the music. From the instant he spoke to her, she was his.
He knew it. She showed it in the proud humility of her eyes, in every
caressing movement of her proudly carried body, and in the way she hung
upon his speech. She was not the young girl as he had known her. She
was a woman, now, and Martin noted that her wild, defiant beauty had
improved, losing none of its wildness, while the defiance and the fire
seemed more in control. “A beauty, a perfect beauty,” he murmured
admiringly under his breath. And he knew she was his, that all he had
to do was to say “Come,” and she would go with him over the world
wherever he led.

Even as the thought flashed through his brain he received a heavy blow
on the side of his head that nearly knocked him down. It was a man’s
fist, directed by a man so angry and in such haste that the fist had
missed the jaw for which it was aimed. Martin turned as he staggered,
and saw the fist coming at him in a wild swing. Quite as a matter of
course he ducked, and the fist flew harmlessly past, pivoting the man
who had driven it. Martin hooked with his left, landing on the pivoting
man with the weight of his body behind the blow. The man went to the
ground sidewise, leaped to his feet, and made a mad rush. Martin saw
his passion-distorted face and wondered what could be the cause of the
fellow’s anger. But while he wondered, he shot in a straight left, the
weight of his body behind the blow. The man went over backward and fell
in a crumpled heap. Jimmy and others of the gang were running toward
them.

Martin was thrilling all over. This was the old days with a vengeance,
with their dancing, and their fighting, and their fun. While he kept a
wary eye on his antagonist, he glanced at Lizzie. Usually the girls
screamed when the fellows got to scrapping, but she had not screamed.
She was looking on with bated breath, leaning slightly forward, so keen
was her interest, one hand pressed to her breast, her cheek flushed,
and in her eyes a great and amazed admiration.

The man had gained his feet and was struggling to escape the
restraining arms that were laid on him.

“She was waitin’ for me to come back!” he was proclaiming to all and
sundry. “She was waitin’ for me to come back, an’ then that fresh guy
comes buttin’ in. Let go o’ me, I tell yeh. I’m goin’ to fix ’m.”

“What’s eatin’ yer?” Jimmy was demanding, as he helped hold the young
fellow back. “That guy’s Mart Eden. He’s nifty with his mits, lemme
tell you that, an’ he’ll eat you alive if you monkey with ’m.”

“He can’t steal her on me that way,” the other interjected.

“He licked the Flyin’ Dutchman, an’ you know _him_,” Jimmy went on
expostulating. “An’ he did it in five rounds. You couldn’t last a
minute against him. See?”

This information seemed to have a mollifying effect, and the irate
young man favored Martin with a measuring stare.

“He don’t look it,” he sneered; but the sneer was without passion.

“That’s what the Flyin’ Dutchman thought,” Jimmy assured him. “Come on,
now, let’s get outa this. There’s lots of other girls. Come on.”

The young fellow allowed himself to be led away toward the pavilion,
and the gang followed after him.

“Who is he?” Martin asked Lizzie. “And what’s it all about, anyway?”

Already the zest of combat, which of old had been so keen and lasting,
had died down, and he discovered that he was self-analytical, too much
so to live, single heart and single hand, so primitive an existence.

Lizzie tossed her head.

“Oh, he’s nobody,” she said. “He’s just ben keepin’ company with me.”

“I had to, you see,” she explained after a pause. “I was gettin’ pretty
lonesome. But I never forgot.” Her voice sank lower, and she looked
straight before her. “I’d throw ’m down for you any time.”

Martin looking at her averted face, knowing that all he had to do was
to reach out his hand and pluck her, fell to pondering whether, after
all, there was any real worth in refined, grammatical English, and, so,
forgot to reply to her.

“You put it all over him,” she said tentatively, with a laugh.

“He’s a husky young fellow, though,” he admitted generously. “If they
hadn’t taken him away, he might have given me my hands full.”

“Who was that lady friend I seen you with that night?” she asked
abruptly.

“Oh, just a lady friend,” was his answer.

“It was a long time ago,” she murmured contemplatively. “It seems like
a thousand years.”

But Martin went no further into the matter. He led the conversation off
into other channels. They had lunch in the restaurant, where he ordered
wine and expensive delicacies and afterward he danced with her and with
no one but her, till she was tired. He was a good dancer, and she
whirled around and around with him in a heaven of delight, her head
against his shoulder, wishing that it could last forever. Later in the
afternoon they strayed off among the trees, where, in the good old
fashion, she sat down while he sprawled on his back, his head in her
lap. He lay and dozed, while she fondled his hair, looked down on his
closed eyes, and loved him without reserve. Looking up suddenly, he
read the tender advertisement in her face. Her eyes fluttered down,
then they opened and looked into his with soft defiance.

“I’ve kept straight all these years,” she said, her voice so low that
it was almost a whisper.

In his heart Martin knew that it was the miraculous truth. And at his
heart pleaded a great temptation. It was in his power to make her
happy. Denied happiness himself, why should he deny happiness to her?
He could marry her and take her down with him to dwell in the
grass-walled castle in the Marquesas. The desire to do it was strong,
but stronger still was the imperative command of his nature not to do
it. In spite of himself he was still faithful to Love. The old days of
license and easy living were gone. He could not bring them back, nor
could he go back to them. He was changed—how changed he had not
realized until now.

“I am not a marrying man, Lizzie,” he said lightly.

The hand caressing his hair paused perceptibly, then went on with the
same gentle stroke. He noticed her face harden, but it was with the
hardness of resolution, for still the soft color was in her cheeks and
she was all glowing and melting.

“I did not mean that—” she began, then faltered. “Or anyway I don’t
care.”

“I don’t care,” she repeated. “I’m proud to be your friend. I’d do
anything for you. I’m made that way, I guess.”

Martin sat up. He took her hand in his. He did it deliberately, with
warmth but without passion; and such warmth chilled her.

“Don’t let’s talk about it,” she said.

“You are a great and noble woman,” he said. “And it is I who should be
proud to know you. And I am, I am. You are a ray of light to me in a
very dark world, and I’ve got to be straight with you, just as straight
as you have been.”

“I don’t care whether you’re straight with me or not. You could do
anything with me. You could throw me in the dirt an’ walk on me. An’
you’re the only man in the world that can,” she added with a defiant
flash. “I ain’t taken care of myself ever since I was a kid for
nothin’.”

“And it’s just because of that that I’m not going to,” he said gently.
“You are so big and generous that you challenge me to equal
generousness. I’m not marrying, and I’m not—well, loving without
marrying, though I’ve done my share of that in the past. I’m sorry I
came here to-day and met you. But it can’t be helped now, and I never
expected it would turn out this way.

“But look here, Lizzie. I can’t begin to tell you how much I like you.
I do more than like you. I admire and respect you. You are magnificent,
and you are magnificently good. But what’s the use of words? Yet
there’s something I’d like to do. You’ve had a hard life; let me make
it easy for you.” (A joyous light welled into her eyes, then faded out
again.) “I’m pretty sure of getting hold of some money soon—lots of
it.”

In that moment he abandoned the idea of the valley and the bay, the
grass-walled castle and the trim, white schooner. After all, what did
it matter? He could go away, as he had done so often, before the mast,
on any ship bound anywhere.

“I’d like to turn it over to you. There must be something you want—to
go to school or business college. You might like to study and be a
stenographer. I could fix it for you. Or maybe your father and mother
are living—I could set them up in a grocery store or something.
Anything you want, just name it, and I can fix it for you.”

She made no reply, but sat, gazing straight before her, dry-eyed and
motionless, but with an ache in the throat which Martin divined so
strongly that it made his own throat ache. He regretted that he had
spoken. It seemed so tawdry what he had offered her—mere money—compared
with what she offered him. He offered her an extraneous thing with
which he could part without a pang, while she offered him herself,
along with disgrace and shame, and sin, and all her hopes of heaven.

“Don’t let’s talk about it,” she said with a catch in her voice that
she changed to a cough. She stood up. “Come on, let’s go home. I’m all
tired out.”

The day was done, and the merrymakers had nearly all departed. But as
Martin and Lizzie emerged from the trees they found the gang waiting
for them. Martin knew immediately the meaning of it. Trouble was
brewing. The gang was his body-guard. They passed out through the gates
of the park with, straggling in the rear, a second gang, the friends
that Lizzie’s young man had collected to avenge the loss of his lady.
Several constables and special police officers, anticipating trouble,
trailed along to prevent it, and herded the two gangs separately aboard
the train for San Francisco. Martin told Jimmy that he would get off at
Sixteenth Street Station and catch the electric car into Oakland.
Lizzie was very quiet and without interest in what was impending. The
train pulled in to Sixteenth Street Station, and the waiting electric
car could be seen, the conductor of which was impatiently clanging the
gong.

“There she is,” Jimmy counselled. “Make a run for it, an’ we’ll hold
’em back. Now you go! Hit her up!”

The hostile gang was temporarily disconcerted by the manoeuvre, then it
dashed from the train in pursuit. The staid and sober Oakland folk who
sat upon the car scarcely noted the young fellow and the girl who ran
for it and found a seat in front on the outside. They did not connect
the couple with Jimmy, who sprang on the steps, crying to the
motorman:-

“Slam on the juice, old man, and beat it outa here!”

The next moment Jimmy whirled about, and the passengers saw him land
his fist on the face of a running man who was trying to board the car.
But fists were landing on faces the whole length of the car. Thus,
Jimmy and his gang, strung out on the long, lower steps, met the
attacking gang. The car started with a great clanging of its gong, and,
as Jimmy’s gang drove off the last assailants, they, too, jumped off to
finish the job. The car dashed on, leaving the flurry of combat far
behind, and its dumfounded passengers never dreamed that the quiet
young man and the pretty working-girl sitting in the corner on the
outside seat had been the cause of the row.

Martin had enjoyed the fight, with a recrudescence of the old fighting
thrills. But they quickly died away, and he was oppressed by a great
sadness. He felt very old—centuries older than those careless,
care-free young companions of his others days. He had travelled far,
too far to go back. Their mode of life, which had once been his, was
now distasteful to him. He was disappointed in it all. He had developed
into an alien. As the steam beer had tasted raw, so their companionship
seemed raw to him. He was too far removed. Too many thousands of opened
books yawned between them and him. He had exiled himself. He had
travelled in the vast realm of intellect until he could no longer
return home. On the other hand, he was human, and his gregarious need
for companionship remained unsatisfied. He had found no new home. As
the gang could not understand him, as his own family could not
understand him, as the bourgeoisie could not understand him, so this
girl beside him, whom he honored high, could not understand him nor the
honor he paid her. His sadness was not untouched with bitterness as he
thought it over.

“Make it up with him,” he advised Lizzie, at parting, as they stood in
front of the workingman’s shack in which she lived, near Sixth and
Market. He referred to the young fellow whose place he had usurped that
day.

“I can’t—now,” she said.

“Oh, go on,” he said jovially. “All you have to do is whistle and he’ll
come running.”

“I didn’t mean that,” she said simply.

And he knew what she had meant.

She leaned toward him as he was about to say good night. But she leaned
not imperatively, not seductively, but wistfully and humbly. He was
touched to the heart. His large tolerance rose up in him. He put his
arms around her, and kissed her, and knew that upon his own lips rested
as true a kiss as man ever received.

“My God!” she sobbed. “I could die for you. I could die for you.”

She tore herself from him suddenly and ran up the steps. He felt a
quick moisture in his eyes.

“Martin Eden,” he communed. “You’re not a brute, and you’re a damn poor
Nietzscheman. You’d marry her if you could and fill her quivering heart
full with happiness. But you can’t, you can’t. And it’s a damn shame.”

“‘A poor old tramp explains his poor old ulcers,’” he muttered,
remembering his Henly. “‘Life is, I think, a blunder and a shame.’ It
is—a blunder and a shame.”




CHAPTER XLIII.


“The Shame of the Sun” was published in October. As Martin cut the
cords of the express package and the half-dozen complimentary copies
from the publishers spilled out on the table, a heavy sadness fell upon
him. He thought of the wild delight that would have been his had this
happened a few short months before, and he contrasted that delight that
should have been with his present uncaring coldness. His book, his
first book, and his pulse had not gone up a fraction of a beat, and he
was only sad. It meant little to him now. The most it meant was that it
might bring some money, and little enough did he care for money.

He carried a copy out into the kitchen and presented it to Maria.

“I did it,” he explained, in order to clear up her bewilderment. “I
wrote it in the room there, and I guess some few quarts of your
vegetable soup went into the making of it. Keep it. It’s yours. Just to
remember me by, you know.”

He was not bragging, not showing off. His sole motive was to make her
happy, to make her proud of him, to justify her long faith in him. She
put the book in the front room on top of the family Bible. A sacred
thing was this book her lodger had made, a fetich of friendship. It
softened the blow of his having been a laundryman, and though she could
not understand a line of it, she knew that every line of it was great.
She was a simple, practical, hard-working woman, but she possessed
faith in large endowment.

Just as emotionlessly as he had received “The Shame of the Sun” did he
read the reviews of it that came in weekly from the clipping bureau.
The book was making a hit, that was evident. It meant more gold in the
money sack. He could fix up Lizzie, redeem all his promises, and still
have enough left to build his grass-walled castle.

Singletree, Darnley & Co. had cautiously brought out an edition of
fifteen hundred copies, but the first reviews had started a second
edition of twice the size through the presses; and ere this was
delivered a third edition of five thousand had been ordered. A London
firm made arrangements by cable for an English edition, and hot-footed
upon this came the news of French, German, and Scandinavian
translations in progress. The attack upon the Maeterlinck school could
not have been made at a more opportune moment. A fierce controversy was
precipitated. Saleeby and Haeckel indorsed and defended “The Shame of
the Sun,” for once finding themselves on the same side of a question.
Crookes and Wallace ranged up on the opposing side, while Sir Oliver
Lodge attempted to formulate a compromise that would jibe with his
particular cosmic theories. Maeterlinck’s followers rallied around the
standard of mysticism. Chesterton set the whole world laughing with a
series of alleged non-partisan essays on the subject, and the whole
affair, controversy and controversialists, was well-nigh swept into the
pit by a thundering broadside from George Bernard Shaw. Needless to say
the arena was crowded with hosts of lesser lights, and the dust and
sweat and din became terrific.

“It is a most marvellous happening,” Singletree, Darnley & Co. wrote
Martin, “a critical philosophic essay selling like a novel. You could
not have chosen your subject better, and all contributory factors have
been unwarrantedly propitious. We need scarcely to assure you that we
are making hay while the sun shines. Over forty thousand copies have
already been sold in the United States and Canada, and a new edition of
twenty thousand is on the presses. We are overworked, trying to supply
the demand. Nevertheless we have helped to create that demand. We have
already spent five thousand dollars in advertising. The book is bound
to be a record-breaker.”

“Please find herewith a contract in duplicate for your next book which
we have taken the liberty of forwarding to you. You will please note
that we have increased your royalties to twenty per cent, which is
about as high as a conservative publishing house dares go. If our offer
is agreeable to you, please fill in the proper blank space with the
title of your book. We make no stipulations concerning its nature. Any
book on any subject. If you have one already written, so much the
better. Now is the time to strike. The iron could not be hotter.”

“On receipt of signed contract we shall be pleased to make you an
advance on royalties of five thousand dollars. You see, we have faith
in you, and we are going in on this thing big. We should like, also, to
discuss with you the drawing up of a contract for a term of years, say
ten, during which we shall have the exclusive right of publishing in
book-form all that you produce. But more of this anon.”

Martin laid down the letter and worked a problem in mental arithmetic,
finding the product of fifteen cents times sixty thousand to be nine
thousand dollars. He signed the new contract, inserting “The Smoke of
Joy” in the blank space, and mailed it back to the publishers along
with the twenty storiettes he had written in the days before he
discovered the formula for the newspaper storiette. And promptly as the
United States mail could deliver and return, came Singletree, Darnley &
Co.’s check for five thousand dollars.

“I want you to come down town with me, Maria, this afternoon about two
o’clock,” Martin said, the morning the check arrived. “Or, better, meet
me at Fourteenth and Broadway at two o’clock. I’ll be looking out for
you.”

At the appointed time she was there; but _shoes_ was the only clew to
the mystery her mind had been capable of evolving, and she suffered a
distinct shock of disappointment when Martin walked her right by a
shoe-store and dived into a real estate office. What happened thereupon
resided forever after in her memory as a dream. Fine gentlemen smiled
at her benevolently as they talked with Martin and one another; a
type-writer clicked; signatures were affixed to an imposing document;
her own landlord was there, too, and affixed his signature; and when
all was over and she was outside on the sidewalk, her landlord spoke to
her, saying, “Well, Maria, you won’t have to pay me no seven dollars
and a half this month.”

Maria was too stunned for speech.

“Or next month, or the next, or the next,” her landlord said.

She thanked him incoherently, as if for a favor. And it was not until
she had returned home to North Oakland and conferred with her own kind,
and had the Portuguese grocer investigate, that she really knew that
she was the owner of the little house in which she had lived and for
which she had paid rent so long.

“Why don’t you trade with me no more?” the Portuguese grocer asked
Martin that evening, stepping out to hail him when he got off the car;
and Martin explained that he wasn’t doing his own cooking any more, and
then went in and had a drink of wine on the house. He noted it was the
best wine the grocer had in stock.

“Maria,” Martin announced that night, “I’m going to leave you. And
you’re going to leave here yourself soon. Then you can rent the house
and be a landlord yourself. You’ve a brother in San Leandro or
Haywards, and he’s in the milk business. I want you to send all your
washing back unwashed—understand?—unwashed, and to go out to San
Leandro to-morrow, or Haywards, or wherever it is, and see that brother
of yours. Tell him to come to see me. I’ll be stopping at the Metropole
down in Oakland. He’ll know a good milk-ranch when he sees one.”

And so it was that Maria became a landlord and the sole owner of a
dairy, with two hired men to do the work for her and a bank account
that steadily increased despite the fact that her whole brood wore
shoes and went to school. Few persons ever meet the fairy princes they
dream about; but Maria, who worked hard and whose head was hard, never
dreaming about fairy princes, entertained hers in the guise of an
ex-laundryman.

In the meantime the world had begun to ask: “Who is this Martin Eden?”
He had declined to give any biographical data to his publishers, but
the newspapers were not to be denied. Oakland was his own town, and the
reporters nosed out scores of individuals who could supply information.
All that he was and was not, all that he had done and most of what he
had not done, was spread out for the delectation of the public,
accompanied by snapshots and photographs—the latter procured from the
local photographer who had once taken Martin’s picture and who promptly
copyrighted it and put it on the market. At first, so great was his
disgust with the magazines and all bourgeois society, Martin fought
against publicity; but in the end, because it was easier than not to,
he surrendered. He found that he could not refuse himself to the
special writers who travelled long distances to see him. Then again,
each day was so many hours long, and, since he no longer was occupied
with writing and studying, those hours had to be occupied somehow; so
he yielded to what was to him a whim, permitted interviews, gave his
opinions on literature and philosophy, and even accepted invitations of
the bourgeoisie. He had settled down into a strange and comfortable
state of mind. He no longer cared. He forgave everybody, even the cub
reporter who had painted him red and to whom he now granted a full page
with specially posed photographs.

He saw Lizzie occasionally, and it was patent that she regretted the
greatness that had come to him. It widened the space between them.
Perhaps it was with the hope of narrowing it that she yielded to his
persuasions to go to night school and business college and to have
herself gowned by a wonderful dressmaker who charged outrageous prices.
She improved visibly from day to day, until Martin wondered if he was
doing right, for he knew that all her compliance and endeavor was for
his sake. She was trying to make herself of worth in his eyes—of the
sort of worth he seemed to value. Yet he gave her no hope, treating her
in brotherly fashion and rarely seeing her.

“Overdue” was rushed upon the market by the Meredith-Lowell Company in
the height of his popularity, and being fiction, in point of sales it
made even a bigger strike than “The Shame of the Sun.” Week after week
his was the credit of the unprecedented performance of having two books
at the head of the list of best-sellers. Not only did the story take
with the fiction-readers, but those who read “The Shame of the Sun”
with avidity were likewise attracted to the sea-story by the cosmic
grasp of mastery with which he had handled it. First he had attacked
the literature of mysticism, and had done it exceeding well; and, next,
he had successfully supplied the very literature he had exposited, thus
proving himself to be that rare genius, a critic and a creator in one.

Money poured in on him, fame poured in on him; he flashed, comet-like,
through the world of literature, and he was more amused than interested
by the stir he was making. One thing was puzzling him, a little thing
that would have puzzled the world had it known. But the world would
have puzzled over his bepuzzlement rather than over the little thing
that to him loomed gigantic. Judge Blount invited him to dinner. That
was the little thing, or the beginning of the little thing, that was
soon to become the big thing. He had insulted Judge Blount, treated him
abominably, and Judge Blount, meeting him on the street, invited him to
dinner. Martin bethought himself of the numerous occasions on which he
had met Judge Blount at the Morses’ and when Judge Blount had not
invited him to dinner. Why had he not invited him to dinner then? he
asked himself. He had not changed. He was the same Martin Eden. What
made the difference? The fact that the stuff he had written had
appeared inside the covers of books? But it was work performed. It was
not something he had done since. It was achievement accomplished at the
very time Judge Blount was sharing this general view and sneering at
his Spencer and his intellect. Therefore it was not for any real value,
but for a purely fictitious value that Judge Blount invited him to
dinner.

Martin grinned and accepted the invitation, marvelling the while at his
complacence. And at the dinner, where, with their womankind, were half
a dozen of those that sat in high places, and where Martin found
himself quite the lion, Judge Blount, warmly seconded by Judge Hanwell,
urged privately that Martin should permit his name to be put up for the
Styx—the ultra-select club to which belonged, not the mere men of
wealth, but the men of attainment. And Martin declined, and was more
puzzled than ever.

He was kept busy disposing of his heap of manuscripts. He was
overwhelmed by requests from editors. It had been discovered that he
was a stylist, with meat under his style. _The Northern Review_, after
publishing “The Cradle of Beauty,” had written him for half a dozen
similar essays, which would have been supplied out of the heap, had not
_Burton’s Magazine_, in a speculative mood, offered him five hundred
dollars each for five essays. He wrote back that he would supply the
demand, but at a thousand dollars an essay. He remembered that all
these manuscripts had been refused by the very magazines that were now
clamoring for them. And their refusals had been cold-blooded,
automatic, stereotyped. They had made him sweat, and now he intended to
make them sweat. _Burton’s Magazine_ paid his price for five essays,
and the remaining four, at the same rate, were snapped up by
_Mackintosh’s Monthly, The Northern Review_ being too poor to stand the
pace. Thus went out to the world “The High Priests of Mystery,” “The
Wonder-Dreamers,” “The Yardstick of the Ego,” “Philosophy of Illusion,”
“God and Clod,” “Art and Biology,” “Critics and Test-tubes,”
“Star-dust,” and “The Dignity of Usury,”—to raise storms and rumblings
and mutterings that were many a day in dying down.

Editors wrote to him telling him to name his own terms, which he did,
but it was always for work performed. He refused resolutely to pledge
himself to any new thing. The thought of again setting pen to paper
maddened him. He had seen Brissenden torn to pieces by the crowd, and
despite the fact that him the crowd acclaimed, he could not get over
the shock nor gather any respect for the crowd. His very popularity
seemed a disgrace and a treason to Brissenden. It made him wince, but
he made up his mind to go on and fill the money-bag.

He received letters from editors like the following: “About a year ago
we were unfortunate enough to refuse your collection of love-poems. We
were greatly impressed by them at the time, but certain arrangements
already entered into prevented our taking them. If you still have them,
and if you will be kind enough to forward them, we shall be glad to
publish the entire collection on your own terms. We are also prepared
to make a most advantageous offer for bringing them out in book-form.”

Martin recollected his blank-verse tragedy, and sent it instead. He
read it over before mailing, and was particularly impressed by its
sophomoric amateurishness and general worthlessness. But he sent it;
and it was published, to the everlasting regret of the editor. The
public was indignant and incredulous. It was too far a cry from Martin
Eden’s high standard to that serious bosh. It was asserted that he had
never written it, that the magazine had faked it very clumsily, or that
Martin Eden was emulating the elder Dumas and at the height of success
was hiring his writing done for him. But when he explained that the
tragedy was an early effort of his literary childhood, and that the
magazine had refused to be happy unless it got it, a great laugh went
up at the magazine’s expense and a change in the editorship followed.
The tragedy was never brought out in book-form, though Martin pocketed
the advance royalties that had been paid.

_Coleman’s Weekly_ sent Martin a lengthy telegram, costing nearly three
hundred dollars, offering him a thousand dollars an article for twenty
articles. He was to travel over the United States, with all expenses
paid, and select whatever topics interested him. The body of the
telegram was devoted to hypothetical topics in order to show him the
freedom of range that was to be his. The only restriction placed upon
him was that he must confine himself to the United States. Martin sent
his inability to accept and his regrets by wire “collect.”

“Wiki-Wiki,” published in _Warren’s Monthly_, was an instantaneous
success. It was brought out forward in a wide-margined, beautifully
decorated volume that struck the holiday trade and sold like wildfire.
The critics were unanimous in the belief that it would take its place
with those two classics by two great writers, “The Bottle Imp” and “The
Magic Skin.”

The public, however, received the “Smoke of Joy” collection rather
dubiously and coldly. The audacity and unconventionality of the
storiettes was a shock to bourgeois morality and prejudice; but when
Paris went mad over the immediate translation that was made, the
American and English reading public followed suit and bought so many
copies that Martin compelled the conservative house of Singletree,
Darnley & Co. to pay a flat royalty of twenty-five per cent for a third
book, and thirty per cent flat for a fourth. These two volumes
comprised all the short stories he had written and which had received,
or were receiving, serial publication. “The Ring of Bells” and his
horror stories constituted one collection; the other collection was
composed of “Adventure,” “The Pot,” “The Wine of Life,” “The
Whirlpool,” “The Jostling Street,” and four other stories. The
Lowell-Meredith Company captured the collection of all his essays, and
the Maxmillian Company got his “Sea Lyrics” and the “Love-cycle,” the
latter receiving serial publication in the _Ladies’ Home Companion_
after the payment of an extortionate price.

Martin heaved a sigh of relief when he had disposed of the last
manuscript. The grass-walled castle and the white, coppered schooner
were very near to him. Well, at any rate he had discovered Brissenden’s
contention that nothing of merit found its way into the magazines. His
own success demonstrated that Brissenden had been wrong.

And yet, somehow, he had a feeling that Brissenden had been right,
after all. “The Shame of the Sun” had been the cause of his success
more than the stuff he had written. That stuff had been merely
incidental. It had been rejected right and left by the magazines. The
publication of “The Shame of the Sun” had started a controversy and
precipitated the landslide in his favor. Had there been no “Shame of
the Sun” there would have been no landslide, and had there been no
miracle in the go of “The Shame of the Sun” there would have been no
landslide. Singletree, Darnley & Co. attested that miracle. They had
brought out a first edition of fifteen hundred copies and been dubious
of selling it. They were experienced publishers and no one had been
more astounded than they at the success which had followed. To them it
had been in truth a miracle. They never got over it, and every letter
they wrote him reflected their reverent awe of that first mysterious
happening. They did not attempt to explain it. There was no explaining
it. It had happened. In the face of all experience to the contrary, it
had happened.

So it was, reasoning thus, that Martin questioned the validity of his
popularity. It was the bourgeoisie that bought his books and poured its
gold into his money-sack, and from what little he knew of the
bourgeoisie it was not clear to him how it could possibly appreciate or
comprehend what he had written. His intrinsic beauty and power meant
nothing to the hundreds of thousands who were acclaiming him and buying
his books. He was the fad of the hour, the adventurer who had stormed
Parnassus while the gods nodded. The hundreds of thousands read him and
acclaimed him with the same brute non-understanding with which they had
flung themselves on Brissenden’s “Ephemera” and torn it to pieces—a
wolf-rabble that fawned on him instead of fanging him. Fawn or fang, it
was all a matter of chance. One thing he knew with absolute certitude:
“Ephemera” was infinitely greater than anything he had done. It was
infinitely greater than anything he had in him. It was a poem of
centuries. Then the tribute the mob paid him was a sorry tribute
indeed, for that same mob had wallowed “Ephemera” into the mire. He
sighed heavily and with satisfaction. He was glad the last manuscript
was sold and that he would soon be done with it all.




CHAPTER XLIV.


Mr. Morse met Martin in the office of the Hotel Metropole. Whether he
had happened there just casually, intent on other affairs, or whether
he had come there for the direct purpose of inviting him to dinner,
Martin never could quite make up his mind, though he inclined toward
the second hypothesis. At any rate, invited to dinner he was by Mr.
Morse—Ruth’s father, who had forbidden him the house and broken off the
engagement.

Martin was not angry. He was not even on his dignity. He tolerated Mr.
Morse, wondering the while how it felt to eat such humble pie. He did
not decline the invitation. Instead, he put it off with vagueness and
indefiniteness and inquired after the family, particularly after Mrs.
Morse and Ruth. He spoke her name without hesitancy, naturally, though
secretly surprised that he had had no inward quiver, no old, familiar
increase of pulse and warm surge of blood.

He had many invitations to dinner, some of which he accepted. Persons
got themselves introduced to him in order to invite him to dinner. And
he went on puzzling over the little thing that was becoming a great
thing. Bernard Higginbotham invited him to dinner. He puzzled the
harder. He remembered the days of his desperate starvation when no one
invited him to dinner. That was the time he needed dinners, and went
weak and faint for lack of them and lost weight from sheer famine. That
was the paradox of it. When he wanted dinners, no one gave them to him,
and now that he could buy a hundred thousand dinners and was losing his
appetite, dinners were thrust upon him right and left. But why? There
was no justice in it, no merit on his part. He was no different. All
the work he had done was even at that time work performed. Mr. and Mrs.
Morse had condemned him for an idler and a shirk and through Ruth had
urged that he take a clerk’s position in an office. Furthermore, they
had been aware of his work performed. Manuscript after manuscript of
his had been turned over to them by Ruth. They had read them. It was
the very same work that had put his name in all the papers, and, it was
his name being in all the papers that led them to invite him.

One thing was certain: the Morses had not cared to have him for himself
or for his work. Therefore they could not want him now for himself or
for his work, but for the fame that was his, because he was somebody
amongst men, and—why not?—because he had a hundred thousand dollars or
so. That was the way bourgeois society valued a man, and who was he to
expect it otherwise? But he was proud. He disdained such valuation. He
desired to be valued for himself, or for his work, which, after all,
was an expression of himself. That was the way Lizzie valued him. The
work, with her, did not even count. She valued him, himself. That was
the way Jimmy, the plumber, and all the old gang valued him. That had
been proved often enough in the days when he ran with them; it had been
proved that Sunday at Shell Mound Park. His work could go hang. What
they liked, and were willing to scrap for, was just Mart Eden, one of
the bunch and a pretty good guy.

Then there was Ruth. She had liked him for himself, that was
indisputable. And yet, much as she had liked him she had liked the
bourgeois standard of valuation more. She had opposed his writing, and
principally, it seemed to him, because it did not earn money. That had
been her criticism of his “Love-cycle.” She, too, had urged him to get
a job. It was true, she refined it to “position,” but it meant the same
thing, and in his own mind the old nomenclature stuck. He had read her
all that he wrote—poems, stories, essays—“Wiki-Wiki,” “The Shame of the
Sun,” everything. And she had always and consistently urged him to get
a job, to go to work—good God!—as if he hadn’t been working, robbing
sleep, exhausting life, in order to be worthy of her.

So the little thing grew bigger. He was healthy and normal, ate
regularly, slept long hours, and yet the growing little thing was
becoming an obsession. _Work performed_. The phrase haunted his brain.
He sat opposite Bernard Higginbotham at a heavy Sunday dinner over
Higginbotham’s Cash Store, and it was all he could do to restrain
himself from shouting out:-

“It was work performed! And now you feed me, when then you let me
starve, forbade me your house, and damned me because I wouldn’t get a
job. And the work was already done, all done. And now, when I speak,
you check the thought unuttered on your lips and hang on my lips and
pay respectful attention to whatever I choose to say. I tell you your
party is rotten and filled with grafters, and instead of flying into a
rage you hum and haw and admit there is a great deal in what I say. And
why? Because I’m famous; because I’ve a lot of money. Not because I’m
Martin Eden, a pretty good fellow and not particularly a fool. I could
tell you the moon is made of green cheese and you would subscribe to
the notion, at least you would not repudiate it, because I’ve got
dollars, mountains of them. And it was all done long ago; it was work
performed, I tell you, when you spat upon me as the dirt under your
feet.”

But Martin did not shout out. The thought gnawed in his brain, an
unceasing torment, while he smiled and succeeded in being tolerant. As
he grew silent, Bernard Higginbotham got the reins and did the talking.
He was a success himself, and proud of it. He was self-made. No one had
helped him. He owed no man. He was fulfilling his duty as a citizen and
bringing up a large family. And there was Higginbotham’s Cash Store,
that monument of his own industry and ability. He loved Higginbotham’s
Cash Store as some men loved their wives. He opened up his heart to
Martin, showed with what keenness and with what enormous planning he
had made the store. And he had plans for it, ambitious plans. The
neighborhood was growing up fast. The store was really too small. If he
had more room, he would be able to put in a score of labor-saving and
money-saving improvements. And he would do it yet. He was straining
every effort for the day when he could buy the adjoining lot and put up
another two-story frame building. The upstairs he could rent, and the
whole ground-floor of both buildings would be Higginbotham’s Cash
Store. His eyes glistened when he spoke of the new sign that would
stretch clear across both buildings.

Martin forgot to listen. The refrain of “Work performed,” in his own
brain, was drowning the other’s clatter. The refrain maddened him, and
he tried to escape from it.

“How much did you say it would cost?” he asked suddenly.

His brother-in-law paused in the middle of an expatiation on the
business opportunities of the neighborhood. He hadn’t said how much it
would cost. But he knew. He had figured it out a score of times.

“At the way lumber is now,” he said, “four thousand could do it.”

“Including the sign?”

“I didn’t count on that. It’d just have to come, onc’t the buildin’ was
there.”

“And the ground?”

“Three thousand more.”

He leaned forward, licking his lips, nervously spreading and closing
his fingers, while he watched Martin write a check. When it was passed
over to him, he glanced at the amount-seven thousand dollars.

“I—I can’t afford to pay more than six per cent,” he said huskily.

Martin wanted to laugh, but, instead, demanded:-

“How much would that be?”

“Lemme see. Six per cent—six times seven—four hundred an’ twenty.”

“That would be thirty-five dollars a month, wouldn’t it?”

Higginbotham nodded.

“Then, if you’ve no objection, we’ll arrange it this way.” Martin
glanced at Gertrude. “You can have the principal to keep for yourself,
if you’ll use the thirty-five dollars a month for cooking and washing
and scrubbing. The seven thousand is yours if you’ll guarantee that
Gertrude does no more drudgery. Is it a go?”

Mr. Higginbotham swallowed hard. That his wife should do no more
housework was an affront to his thrifty soul. The magnificent present
was the coating of a pill, a bitter pill. That his wife should not
work! It gagged him.

“All right, then,” Martin said. “I’ll pay the thirty-five a month,
and—”

He reached across the table for the check. But Bernard Higginbotham got
his hand on it first, crying:

“I accept! I accept!”

When Martin got on the electric car, he was very sick and tired. He
looked up at the assertive sign.

“The swine,” he groaned. “The swine, the swine.”

When _Mackintosh’s Magazine_ published “The Palmist,” featuring it with
decorations by Berthier and with two pictures by Wenn, Hermann von
Schmidt forgot that he had called the verses obscene. He announced that
his wife had inspired the poem, saw to it that the news reached the
ears of a reporter, and submitted to an interview by a staff writer who
was accompanied by a staff photographer and a staff artist. The result
was a full page in a Sunday supplement, filled with photographs and
idealized drawings of Marian, with many intimate details of Martin Eden
and his family, and with the full text of “The Palmist” in large type,
and republished by special permission of _Mackintosh’s Magazine_. It
caused quite a stir in the neighborhood, and good housewives were proud
to have the acquaintances of the great writer’s sister, while those who
had not made haste to cultivate it. Hermann von Schmidt chuckled in his
little repair shop and decided to order a new lathe. “Better than
advertising,” he told Marian, “and it costs nothing.”

“We’d better have him to dinner,” she suggested.

And to dinner Martin came, making himself agreeable with the fat
wholesale butcher and his fatter wife—important folk, they, likely to
be of use to a rising young man like Hermann von Schmidt. No less a
bait, however, had been required to draw them to his house than his
great brother-in-law. Another man at table who had swallowed the same
bait was the superintendent of the Pacific Coast agencies for the Asa
Bicycle Company. Him Von Schmidt desired to please and propitiate
because from him could be obtained the Oakland agency for the bicycle.
So Hermann von Schmidt found it a goodly asset to have Martin for a
brother-in-law, but in his heart of hearts he couldn’t understand where
it all came in. In the silent watches of the night, while his wife
slept, he had floundered through Martin’s books and poems, and decided
that the world was a fool to buy them.

And in his heart of hearts Martin understood the situation only too
well, as he leaned back and gloated at Von Schmidt’s head, in fancy
punching it well-nigh off of him, sending blow after blow home just
right—the chuckle-headed Dutchman! One thing he did like about him,
however. Poor as he was, and determined to rise as he was, he
nevertheless hired one servant to take the heavy work off of Marian’s
hands. Martin talked with the superintendent of the Asa agencies, and
after dinner he drew him aside with Hermann, whom he backed financially
for the best bicycle store with fittings in Oakland. He went further,
and in a private talk with Hermann told him to keep his eyes open for
an automobile agency and garage, for there was no reason that he should
not be able to run both establishments successfully.

With tears in her eyes and her arms around his neck, Marian, at
parting, told Martin how much she loved him and always had loved him.
It was true, there was a perceptible halt midway in her assertion,
which she glossed over with more tears and kisses and incoherent
stammerings, and which Martin inferred to be her appeal for forgiveness
for the time she had lacked faith in him and insisted on his getting a
job.

“He can’t never keep his money, that’s sure,” Hermann von Schmidt
confided to his wife. “He got mad when I spoke of interest, an’ he said
damn the principal and if I mentioned it again, he’d punch my Dutch
head off. That’s what he said—my Dutch head. But he’s all right, even
if he ain’t no business man. He’s given me my chance, an’ he’s all
right.”

Invitations to dinner poured in on Martin; and the more they poured,
the more he puzzled. He sat, the guest of honor, at an Arden Club
banquet, with men of note whom he had heard about and read about all
his life; and they told him how, when they had read “The Ring of Bells”
in the _Transcontinental_, and “The Peri and the Pearl” in _The
Hornet_, they had immediately picked him for a winner. My God! and I
was hungry and in rags, he thought to himself. Why didn’t you give me a
dinner then? Then was the time. It was work performed. If you are
feeding me now for work performed, why did you not feed me then when I
needed it? Not one word in “The Ring of Bells,” nor in “The Peri and
the Pearl” has been changed. No; you’re not feeding me now for work
performed. You are feeding me because everybody else is feeding me and
because it is an honor to feed me. You are feeding me now because you
are herd animals; because you are part of the mob; because the one
blind, automatic thought in the mob-mind just now is to feed me. And
where does Martin Eden and the work Martin Eden performed come in in
all this? he asked himself plaintively, then arose to respond cleverly
and wittily to a clever and witty toast.

So it went. Wherever he happened to be—at the Press Club, at the
Redwood Club, at pink teas and literary gatherings—always were
remembered “The Ring of Bells” and “The Peri and the Pearl” when they
were first published. And always was Martin’s maddening and unuttered
demand: Why didn’t you feed me then? It was work performed. “The Ring
of Bells” and “The Peri and the Pearl” are not changed one iota. They
were just as artistic, just as worth while, then as now. But you are
not feeding me for their sake, nor for the sake of anything else I have
written. You’re feeding me because it is the style of feeding just now,
because the whole mob is crazy with the idea of feeding Martin Eden.

And often, at such times, he would abruptly see slouch in among the
company a young hoodlum in square-cut coat and under a stiff-rim
Stetson hat. It happened to him at the Gallina Society in Oakland one
afternoon. As he rose from his chair and stepped forward across the
platform, he saw stalk through the wide door at the rear of the great
room the young hoodlum with the square-cut coat and stiff-rim hat. Five
hundred fashionably gowned women turned their heads, so intent and
steadfast was Martin’s gaze, to see what he was seeing. But they saw
only the empty centre aisle. He saw the young tough lurching down that
aisle and wondered if he would remove the stiff-rim which never yet had
he seen him without. Straight down the aisle he came, and up the
platform. Martin could have wept over that youthful shade of himself,
when he thought of all that lay before him. Across the platform he
swaggered, right up to Martin, and into the foreground of Martin’s
consciousness disappeared. The five hundred women applauded softly with
gloved hands, seeking to encourage the bashful great man who was their
guest. And Martin shook the vision from his brain, smiled, and began to
speak.

The Superintendent of Schools, good old man, stopped Martin on the
street and remembered him, recalling seances in his office when Martin
was expelled from school for fighting.

“I read your ‘Ring of Bells’ in one of the magazines quite a time ago,”
he said. “It was as good as Poe. Splendid, I said at the time,
splendid!”

Yes, and twice in the months that followed you passed me on the street
and did not know me, Martin almost said aloud. Each time I was hungry
and heading for the pawnbroker. Yet it was work performed. You did not
know me then. Why do you know me now?

“I was remarking to my wife only the other day,” the other was saying,
“wouldn’t it be a good idea to have you out to dinner some time? And
she quite agreed with me. Yes, she quite agreed with me.”

“Dinner?” Martin said so sharply that it was almost a snarl.

“Why, yes, yes, dinner, you know—just pot luck with us, with your old
superintendent, you rascal,” he uttered nervously, poking Martin in an
attempt at jocular fellowship.

Martin went down the street in a daze. He stopped at the corner and
looked about him vacantly.

“Well, I’ll be damned!” he murmured at last. “The old fellow was afraid
of me.”




CHAPTER XLV.


Kreis came to Martin one day—Kreis, of the “real dirt”; and Martin
turned to him with relief, to receive the glowing details of a scheme
sufficiently wild-catty to interest him as a fictionist rather than an
investor. Kreis paused long enough in the midst of his exposition to
tell him that in most of his “Shame of the Sun” he had been a chump.

“But I didn’t come here to spout philosophy,” Kreis went on. “What I
want to know is whether or not you will put a thousand dollars in on
this deal?”

“No, I’m not chump enough for that, at any rate,” Martin answered. “But
I’ll tell you what I will do. You gave me the greatest night of my
life. You gave me what money cannot buy. Now I’ve got money, and it
means nothing to me. I’d like to turn over to you a thousand dollars of
what I don’t value for what you gave me that night and which was beyond
price. You need the money. I’ve got more than I need. You want it. You
came for it. There’s no use scheming it out of me. Take it.”

Kreis betrayed no surprise. He folded the check away in his pocket.

“At that rate I’d like the contract of providing you with many such
nights,” he said.

“Too late.” Martin shook his head. “That night was the one night for
me. I was in paradise. It’s commonplace with you, I know. But it wasn’t
to me. I shall never live at such a pitch again. I’m done with
philosophy. I want never to hear another word of it.”

“The first dollar I ever made in my life out of my philosophy,” Kreis
remarked, as he paused in the doorway. “And then the market broke.”

Mrs. Morse drove by Martin on the street one day, and smiled and
nodded. He smiled back and lifted his hat. The episode did not affect
him. A month before it might have disgusted him, or made him curious
and set him to speculating about her state of consciousness at that
moment. But now it was not provocative of a second thought. He forgot
about it the next moment. He forgot about it as he would have forgotten
the Central Bank Building or the City Hall after having walked past
them. Yet his mind was preternaturally active. His thoughts went ever
around and around in a circle. The centre of that circle was “work
performed”; it ate at his brain like a deathless maggot. He awoke to it
in the morning. It tormented his dreams at night. Every affair of life
around him that penetrated through his senses immediately related
itself to “work performed.” He drove along the path of relentless logic
to the conclusion that he was nobody, nothing. Mart Eden, the hoodlum,
and Mart Eden, the sailor, had been real, had been he; but Martin Eden!
the famous writer, did not exist. Martin Eden, the famous writer, was a
vapor that had arisen in the mob-mind and by the mob-mind had been
thrust into the corporeal being of Mart Eden, the hoodlum and sailor.
But it couldn’t fool him. He was not that sun-myth that the mob was
worshipping and sacrificing dinners to. He knew better.

He read the magazines about himself, and pored over portraits of
himself published therein until he was unable to associate his identity
with those portraits. He was the fellow who had lived and thrilled and
loved; who had been easy-going and tolerant of the frailties of life;
who had served in the forecastle, wandered in strange lands, and led
his gang in the old fighting days. He was the fellow who had been
stunned at first by the thousands of books in the free library, and who
had afterward learned his way among them and mastered them; he was the
fellow who had burned the midnight oil and bedded with a spur and
written books himself. But the one thing he was not was that colossal
appetite that all the mob was bent upon feeding.

There were things, however, in the magazines that amused him. All the
magazines were claiming him. _Warren’s Monthly_ advertised to its
subscribers that it was always on the quest after new writers, and
that, among others, it had introduced Martin Eden to the reading
public. _The White Mouse_ claimed him; so did _The Northern Review_ and
_Mackintosh’s Magazine_, until silenced by _The Globe_, which pointed
triumphantly to its files where the mangled “Sea Lyrics” lay buried.
_Youth and Age_, which had come to life again after having escaped
paying its bills, put in a prior claim, which nobody but farmers’
children ever read. The _Transcontinental_ made a dignified and
convincing statement of how it first discovered Martin Eden, which was
warmly disputed by _The Hornet_, with the exhibit of “The Peri and the
Pearl.” The modest claim of Singletree, Darnley & Co. was lost in the
din. Besides, that publishing firm did not own a magazine wherewith to
make its claim less modest.

The newspapers calculated Martin’s royalties. In some way the
magnificent offers certain magazines had made him leaked out, and
Oakland ministers called upon him in a friendly way, while professional
begging letters began to clutter his mail. But worse than all this were
the women. His photographs were published broadcast, and special
writers exploited his strong, bronzed face, his scars, his heavy
shoulders, his clear, quiet eyes, and the slight hollows in his cheeks
like an ascetic’s. At this last he remembered his wild youth and
smiled. Often, among the women he met, he would see now one, now
another, looking at him, appraising him, selecting him. He laughed to
himself. He remembered Brissenden’s warning and laughed again. The
women would never destroy him, that much was certain. He had gone past
that stage.

Once, walking with Lizzie toward night school, she caught a glance
directed toward him by a well-gowned, handsome woman of the
bourgeoisie. The glance was a trifle too long, a shade too
considerative. Lizzie knew it for what it was, and her body tensed
angrily. Martin noticed, noticed the cause of it, told her how used he
was becoming to it and that he did not care anyway.

“You ought to care,” she answered with blazing eyes. “You’re sick.
That’s what’s the matter.”

“Never healthier in my life. I weigh five pounds more than I ever did.”

“It ain’t your body. It’s your head. Something’s wrong with your
think-machine. Even I can see that, an’ I ain’t nobody.”

He walked on beside her, reflecting.

“I’d give anything to see you get over it,” she broke out impulsively.
“You ought to care when women look at you that way, a man like you.
It’s not natural. It’s all right enough for sissy-boys. But you ain’t
made that way. So help me, I’d be willing an’ glad if the right woman
came along an’ made you care.”

When he left Lizzie at night school, he returned to the Metropole.

Once in his rooms, he dropped into a Morris chair and sat staring
straight before him. He did not doze. Nor did he think. His mind was a
blank, save for the intervals when unsummoned memory pictures took form
and color and radiance just under his eyelids. He saw these pictures,
but he was scarcely conscious of them—no more so than if they had been
dreams. Yet he was not asleep. Once, he roused himself and glanced at
his watch. It was just eight o’clock. He had nothing to do, and it was
too early for bed. Then his mind went blank again, and the pictures
began to form and vanish under his eyelids. There was nothing
distinctive about the pictures. They were always masses of leaves and
shrub-like branches shot through with hot sunshine.

A knock at the door aroused him. He was not asleep, and his mind
immediately connected the knock with a telegram, or letter, or perhaps
one of the servants bringing back clean clothes from the laundry. He
was thinking about Joe and wondering where he was, as he said, “Come
in.”

He was still thinking about Joe, and did not turn toward the door. He
heard it close softly. There was a long silence. He forgot that there
had been a knock at the door, and was still staring blankly before him
when he heard a woman’s sob. It was involuntary, spasmodic, checked,
and stifled—he noted that as he turned about. The next instant he was
on his feet.

“Ruth!” he said, amazed and bewildered.

Her face was white and strained. She stood just inside the door, one
hand against it for support, the other pressed to her side. She
extended both hands toward him piteously, and started forward to meet
him. As he caught her hands and led her to the Morris chair he noticed
how cold they were. He drew up another chair and sat down on the broad
arm of it. He was too confused to speak. In his own mind his affair
with Ruth was closed and sealed. He felt much in the same way that he
would have felt had the Shelly Hot Springs Laundry suddenly invaded the
Hotel Metropole with a whole week’s washing ready for him to pitch
into. Several times he was about to speak, and each time he hesitated.

“No one knows I am here,” Ruth said in a faint voice, with an appealing
smile.

“What did you say?”

He was surprised at the sound of his own voice.

She repeated her words.

“Oh,” he said, then wondered what more he could possibly say.

“I saw you come in, and I waited a few minutes.”

“Oh,” he said again.

He had never been so tongue-tied in his life. Positively he did not
have an idea in his head. He felt stupid and awkward, but for the life
of him he could think of nothing to say. It would have been easier had
the intrusion been the Shelly Hot Springs laundry. He could have rolled
up his sleeves and gone to work.

“And then you came in,” he said finally.

She nodded, with a slightly arch expression, and loosened the scarf at
her throat.

“I saw you first from across the street when you were with that girl.”

“Oh, yes,” he said simply. “I took her down to night school.”

“Well, aren’t you glad to see me?” she said at the end of another
silence.

“Yes, yes.” He spoke hastily. “But wasn’t it rash of you to come here?”

“I slipped in. Nobody knows I am here. I wanted to see you. I came to
tell you I have been very foolish. I came because I could no longer
stay away, because my heart compelled me to come, because—because I
wanted to come.”

She came forward, out of her chair and over to him. She rested her hand
on his shoulder a moment, breathing quickly, and then slipped into his
arms. And in his large, easy way, desirous of not inflicting hurt,
knowing that to repulse this proffer of herself was to inflict the most
grievous hurt a woman could receive, he folded his arms around her and
held her close. But there was no warmth in the embrace, no caress in
the contact. She had come into his arms, and he held her, that was all.
She nestled against him, and then, with a change of position, her hands
crept up and rested upon his neck. But his flesh was not fire beneath
those hands, and he felt awkward and uncomfortable.

“What makes you tremble so?” he asked. “Is it a chill? Shall I light
the grate?”

He made a movement to disengage himself, but she clung more closely to
him, shivering violently.

“It is merely nervousness,” she said with chattering teeth. “I’ll
control myself in a minute. There, I am better already.”

Slowly her shivering died away. He continued to hold her, but he was no
longer puzzled. He knew now for what she had come.

“My mother wanted me to marry Charley Hapgood,” she announced.

“Charley Hapgood, that fellow who speaks always in platitudes?” Martin
groaned. Then he added, “And now, I suppose, your mother wants you to
marry me.”

He did not put it in the form of a question. He stated it as a
certitude, and before his eyes began to dance the rows of figures of
his royalties.

“She will not object, I know that much,” Ruth said.

“She considers me quite eligible?”

Ruth nodded.

“And yet I am not a bit more eligible now than I was when she broke our
engagement,” he meditated. “I haven’t changed any. I’m the same Martin
Eden, though for that matter I’m a bit worse—I smoke now. Don’t you
smell my breath?”

In reply she pressed her open fingers against his lips, placed them
graciously and playfully, and in expectancy of the kiss that of old had
always been a consequence. But there was no caressing answer of
Martin’s lips. He waited until the fingers were removed and then went
on.

“I am not changed. I haven’t got a job. I’m not looking for a job.
Furthermore, I am not going to look for a job. And I still believe that
Herbert Spencer is a great and noble man and that Judge Blount is an
unmitigated ass. I had dinner with him the other night, so I ought to
know.”

“But you didn’t accept father’s invitation,” she chided.

“So you know about that? Who sent him? Your mother?”

She remained silent.

“Then she did send him. I thought so. And now I suppose she has sent
you.”

“No one knows that I am here,” she protested. “Do you think my mother
would permit this?”

“She’d permit you to marry me, that’s certain.”

She gave a sharp cry. “Oh, Martin, don’t be cruel. You have not kissed
me once. You are as unresponsive as a stone. And think what I have
dared to do.” She looked about her with a shiver, though half the look
was curiosity. “Just think of where I am.”

“_I could die for you! I could die for you_!”—Lizzie’s words were
ringing in his ears.

“Why didn’t you dare it before?” he asked harshly. “When I hadn’t a
job? When I was starving? When I was just as I am now, as a man, as an
artist, the same Martin Eden? That’s the question I’ve been propounding
to myself for many a day—not concerning you merely, but concerning
everybody. You see I have not changed, though my sudden apparent
appreciation in value compels me constantly to reassure myself on that
point. I’ve got the same flesh on my bones, the same ten fingers and
toes. I am the same. I have not developed any new strength nor virtue.
My brain is the same old brain. I haven’t made even one new
generalization on literature or philosophy. I am personally of the same
value that I was when nobody wanted me. And what is puzzling me is why
they want me now. Surely they don’t want me for myself, for myself is
the same old self they did not want. Then they must want me for
something else, for something that is outside of me, for something that
is not I! Shall I tell you what that something is? It is for the
recognition I have received. That recognition is not I. It resides in
the minds of others. Then again for the money I have earned and am
earning. But that money is not I. It resides in banks and in the
pockets of Tom, Dick, and Harry. And is it for that, for the
recognition and the money, that you now want me?”

“You are breaking my heart,” she sobbed. “You know I love you, that I
am here because I love you.”

“I am afraid you don’t see my point,” he said gently. “What I mean is:
if you love me, how does it happen that you love me now so much more
than you did when your love was weak enough to deny me?”

“Forget and forgive,” she cried passionately. “I loved you all the
time, remember that, and I am here, now, in your arms.”

“I’m afraid I am a shrewd merchant, peering into the scales, trying to
weigh your love and find out what manner of thing it is.”

She withdrew herself from his arms, sat upright, and looked at him long
and searchingly. She was about to speak, then faltered and changed her
mind.

“You see, it appears this way to me,” he went on. “When I was all that
I am now, nobody out of my own class seemed to care for me. When my
books were all written, no one who had read the manuscripts seemed to
care for them. In point of fact, because of the stuff I had written
they seemed to care even less for me. In writing the stuff it seemed
that I had committed acts that were, to say the least, derogatory. ‘Get
a job,’ everybody said.”

She made a movement of dissent.

“Yes, yes,” he said; “except in your case you told me to get a
position. The homely word _job_, like much that I have written, offends
you. It is brutal. But I assure you it was no less brutal to me when
everybody I knew recommended it to me as they would recommend right
conduct to an immoral creature. But to return. The publication of what
I had written, and the public notice I received, wrought a change in
the fibre of your love. Martin Eden, with his work all performed, you
would not marry. Your love for him was not strong enough to enable you
to marry him. But your love is now strong enough, and I cannot avoid
the conclusion that its strength arises from the publication and the
public notice. In your case I do not mention royalties, though I am
certain that they apply to the change wrought in your mother and
father. Of course, all this is not flattering to me. But worst of all,
it makes me question love, sacred love. Is love so gross a thing that
it must feed upon publication and public notice? It would seem so. I
have sat and thought upon it till my head went around.”

“Poor, dear head.” She reached up a hand and passed the fingers
soothingly through his hair. “Let it go around no more. Let us begin
anew, now. I loved you all the time. I know that I was weak in yielding
to my mother’s will. I should not have done so. Yet I have heard you
speak so often with broad charity of the fallibility and frailty of
humankind. Extend that charity to me. I acted mistakenly. Forgive me.”

“Oh, I do forgive,” he said impatiently. “It is easy to forgive where
there is really nothing to forgive. Nothing that you have done requires
forgiveness. One acts according to one’s lights, and more than that one
cannot do. As well might I ask you to forgive me for my not getting a
job.”

“I meant well,” she protested. “You know that I could not have loved
you and not meant well.”

“True; but you would have destroyed me out of your well-meaning.”

“Yes, yes,” he shut off her attempted objection. “You would have
destroyed my writing and my career. Realism is imperative to my nature,
and the bourgeois spirit hates realism. The bourgeoisie is cowardly. It
is afraid of life. And all your effort was to make me afraid of life.
You would have formalized me. You would have compressed me into a
two-by-four pigeonhole of life, where all life’s values are unreal, and
false, and vulgar.” He felt her stir protestingly. “Vulgarity—a hearty
vulgarity, I’ll admit—is the basis of bourgeois refinement and culture.
As I say, you wanted to formalize me, to make me over into one of your
own class, with your class-ideals, class-values, and class-prejudices.”
He shook his head sadly. “And you do not understand, even now, what I
am saying. My words do not mean to you what I endeavor to make them
mean. What I say is so much fantasy to you. Yet to me it is vital
reality. At the best you are a trifle puzzled and amused that this raw
boy, crawling up out of the mire of the abyss, should pass judgment
upon your class and call it vulgar.”

She leaned her head wearily against his shoulder, and her body shivered
with recurrent nervousness. He waited for a time for her to speak, and
then went on.

“And now you want to renew our love. You want us to be married. You
want me. And yet, listen—if my books had not been noticed, I’d
nevertheless have been just what I am now. And you would have stayed
away. It is all those damned books—”

“Don’t swear,” she interrupted.

Her reproof startled him. He broke into a harsh laugh.

“That’s it,” he said, “at a high moment, when what seems your life’s
happiness is at stake, you are afraid of life in the same old
way—afraid of life and a healthy oath.”

She was stung by his words into realization of the puerility of her
act, and yet she felt that he had magnified it unduly and was
consequently resentful. They sat in silence for a long time, she
thinking desperately and he pondering upon his love which had departed.
He knew, now, that he had not really loved her. It was an idealized
Ruth he had loved, an ethereal creature of his own creating, the bright
and luminous spirit of his love-poems. The real bourgeois Ruth, with
all the bourgeois failings and with the hopeless cramp of the bourgeois
psychology in her mind, he had never loved.

She suddenly began to speak.

“I know that much you have said is so. I have been afraid of life. I
did not love you well enough. I have learned to love better. I love you
for what you are, for what you were, for the ways even by which you
have become. I love you for the ways wherein you differ from what you
call my class, for your beliefs which I do not understand but which I
know I can come to understand. I shall devote myself to understanding
them. And even your smoking and your swearing—they are part of you and
I will love you for them, too. I can still learn. In the last ten
minutes I have learned much. That I have dared to come here is a token
of what I have already learned. Oh, Martin!—”

She was sobbing and nestling close against him.

For the first time his arms folded her gently and with sympathy, and
she acknowledged it with a happy movement and a brightening face.

“It is too late,” he said. He remembered Lizzie’s words. “I am a sick
man—oh, not my body. It is my soul, my brain. I seem to have lost all
values. I care for nothing. If you had been this way a few months ago,
it would have been different. It is too late, now.”

“It is not too late,” she cried. “I will show you. I will prove to you
that my love has grown, that it is greater to me than my class and all
that is dearest to me. All that is dearest to the bourgeoisie I will
flout. I am no longer afraid of life. I will leave my father and
mother, and let my name become a by-word with my friends. I will come
to you here and now, in free love if you will, and I will be proud and
glad to be with you. If I have been a traitor to love, I will now, for
love’s sake, be a traitor to all that made that earlier treason.”

She stood before him, with shining eyes.

“I am waiting, Martin,” she whispered, “waiting for you to accept me.
Look at me.”

It was splendid, he thought, looking at her. She had redeemed herself
for all that she had lacked, rising up at last, true woman, superior to
the iron rule of bourgeois convention. It was splendid, magnificent,
desperate. And yet, what was the matter with him? He was not thrilled
nor stirred by what she had done. It was splendid and magnificent only
intellectually. In what should have been a moment of fire, he coldly
appraised her. His heart was untouched. He was unaware of any desire
for her. Again he remembered Lizzie’s words.

“I am sick, very sick,” he said with a despairing gesture. “How sick I
did not know till now. Something has gone out of me. I have always been
unafraid of life, but I never dreamed of being sated with life. Life
has so filled me that I am empty of any desire for anything. If there
were room, I should want you, now. You see how sick I am.”

He leaned his head back and closed his eyes; and like a child, crying,
that forgets its grief in watching the sunlight percolate through the
tear-dimmed films over the pupils, so Martin forgot his sickness, the
presence of Ruth, everything, in watching the masses of vegetation,
shot through hotly with sunshine that took form and blazed against this
background of his eyelids. It was not restful, that green foliage. The
sunlight was too raw and glaring. It hurt him to look at it, and yet he
looked, he knew not why.

He was brought back to himself by the rattle of the door-knob. Ruth was
at the door.

“How shall I get out?” she questioned tearfully. “I am afraid.”

“Oh, forgive me,” he cried, springing to his feet. “I’m not myself, you
know. I forgot you were here.” He put his hand to his head. “You see,
I’m not just right. I’ll take you home. We can go out by the servants’
entrance. No one will see us. Pull down that veil and everything will
be all right.”

She clung to his arm through the dim-lighted passages and down the
narrow stairs.

“I am safe now,” she said, when they emerged on the sidewalk, at the
same time starting to take her hand from his arm.

“No, no, I’ll see you home,” he answered.

“No, please don’t,” she objected. “It is unnecessary.”

Again she started to remove her hand. He felt a momentary curiosity.
Now that she was out of danger she was afraid. She was in almost a
panic to be quit of him. He could see no reason for it and attributed
it to her nervousness. So he restrained her withdrawing hand and
started to walk on with her. Halfway down the block, he saw a man in a
long overcoat shrink back into a doorway. He shot a glance in as he
passed by, and, despite the high turned-up collar, he was certain that
he recognized Ruth’s brother, Norman.

During the walk Ruth and Martin held little conversation. She was
stunned. He was apathetic. Once, he mentioned that he was going away,
back to the South Seas, and, once, she asked him to forgive her having
come to him. And that was all. The parting at her door was
conventional. They shook hands, said good night, and he lifted his hat.
The door swung shut, and he lighted a cigarette and turned back for his
hotel. When he came to the doorway into which he had seen Norman
shrink, he stopped and looked in in a speculative humor.

“She lied,” he said aloud. “She made believe to me that she had dared
greatly, and all the while she knew the brother that brought her was
waiting to take her back.” He burst into laughter. “Oh, these
bourgeois! When I was broke, I was not fit to be seen with his sister.
When I have a bank account, he brings her to me.”

As he swung on his heel to go on, a tramp, going in the same direction,
begged him over his shoulder.

“Say, mister, can you give me a quarter to get a bed?” were the words.

But it was the voice that made Martin turn around. The next instant he
had Joe by the hand.

“D’ye remember that time we parted at the Hot Springs?” the other was
saying. “I said then we’d meet again. I felt it in my bones. An’ here
we are.”

“You’re looking good,” Martin said admiringly, “and you’ve put on
weight.”

“I sure have.” Joe’s face was beaming. “I never knew what it was to
live till I hit hoboin’. I’m thirty pounds heavier an’ feel tiptop all
the time. Why, I was worked to skin an’ bone in them old days. Hoboin’
sure agrees with me.”

“But you’re looking for a bed just the same,” Martin chided, “and it’s
a cold night.”

“Huh? Lookin’ for a bed?” Joe shot a hand into his hip pocket and
brought it out filled with small change. “That beats hard graft,” he
exulted. “You just looked good; that’s why I battered you.”

Martin laughed and gave in.

“You’ve several full-sized drunks right there,” he insinuated.

Joe slid the money back into his pocket.

“Not in mine,” he announced. “No gettin’ oryide for me, though there
ain’t nothin’ to stop me except I don’t want to. I’ve ben drunk once
since I seen you last, an’ then it was unexpected, bein’ on an empty
stomach. When I work like a beast, I drink like a beast. When I live
like a man, I drink like a man—a jolt now an’ again when I feel like
it, an’ that’s all.”

Martin arranged to meet him next day, and went on to the hotel. He
paused in the office to look up steamer sailings. The _Mariposa_ sailed
for Tahiti in five days.

“Telephone over to-morrow and reserve a stateroom for me,” he told the
clerk. “No deck-stateroom, but down below, on the weather-side,—the
port-side, remember that, the port-side. You’d better write it down.”

Once in his room he got into bed and slipped off to sleep as gently as
a child. The occurrences of the evening had made no impression on him.
His mind was dead to impressions. The glow of warmth with which he met
Joe had been most fleeting. The succeeding minute he had been bothered
by the ex-laundryman’s presence and by the compulsion of conversation.
That in five more days he sailed for his loved South Seas meant nothing
to him. So he closed his eyes and slept normally and comfortably for
eight uninterrupted hours. He was not restless. He did not change his
position, nor did he dream. Sleep had become to him oblivion, and each
day that he awoke, he awoke with regret. Life worried and bored him,
and time was a vexation.




CHAPTER XLVI.


“Say, Joe,” was his greeting to his old-time working-mate next morning,
“there’s a Frenchman out on Twenty-eighth Street. He’s made a pot of
money, and he’s going back to France. It’s a dandy, well-appointed,
small steam laundry. There’s a start for you if you want to settle
down. Here, take this; buy some clothes with it and be at this man’s
office by ten o’clock. He looked up the laundry for me, and he’ll take
you out and show you around. If you like it, and think it is worth the
price—twelve thousand—let me know and it is yours. Now run along. I’m
busy. I’ll see you later.”

“Now look here, Mart,” the other said slowly, with kindling anger, “I
come here this mornin’ to see you. Savve? I didn’t come here to get no
laundry. I come here for a talk for old friends’ sake, and you shove a
laundry at me. I tell you what you can do. You can take that laundry
an’ go to hell.”

He was out of the room when Martin caught him and whirled him around.

“Now look here, Joe,” he said; “if you act that way, I’ll punch your
head. And for old friends’ sake I’ll punch it hard. Savve?—you will,
will you?”

Joe had clinched and attempted to throw him, and he was twisting and
writhing out of the advantage of the other’s hold. They reeled about
the room, locked in each other’s arms, and came down with a crash
across the splintered wreckage of a wicker chair. Joe was underneath,
with arms spread out and held and with Martin’s knee on his chest. He
was panting and gasping for breath when Martin released him.

“Now we’ll talk a moment,” Martin said. “You can’t get fresh with me. I
want that laundry business finished first of all. Then you can come
back and we’ll talk for old sake’s sake. I told you I was busy. Look at
that.”

A servant had just come in with the morning mail, a great mass of
letters and magazines.

“How can I wade through that and talk with you? You go and fix up that
laundry, and then we’ll get together.”

“All right,” Joe admitted reluctantly. “I thought you was turnin’ me
down, but I guess I was mistaken. But you can’t lick me, Mart, in a
stand-up fight. I’ve got the reach on you.”

“We’ll put on the gloves sometime and see,” Martin said with a smile.

“Sure; as soon as I get that laundry going.” Joe extended his arm. “You
see that reach? It’ll make you go a few.”

Martin heaved a sigh of relief when the door closed behind the
laundryman. He was becoming anti-social. Daily he found it a severer
strain to be decent with people. Their presence perturbed him, and the
effort of conversation irritated him. They made him restless, and no
sooner was he in contact with them than he was casting about for
excuses to get rid of them.

He did not proceed to attack his mail, and for a half hour he lolled in
his chair, doing nothing, while no more than vague, half-formed
thoughts occasionally filtered through his intelligence, or rather, at
wide intervals, themselves constituted the flickering of his
intelligence.

He roused himself and began glancing through his mail. There were a
dozen requests for autographs—he knew them at sight; there were
professional begging letters; and there were letters from cranks,
ranging from the man with a working model of perpetual motion, and the
man who demonstrated that the surface of the earth was the inside of a
hollow sphere, to the man seeking financial aid to purchase the
Peninsula of Lower California for the purpose of communist
colonization. There were letters from women seeking to know him, and
over one such he smiled, for enclosed was her receipt for pew-rent,
sent as evidence of her good faith and as proof of her respectability.

Editors and publishers contributed to the daily heap of letters, the
former on their knees for his manuscripts, the latter on their knees
for his books—his poor disdained manuscripts that had kept all he
possessed in pawn for so many dreary months in order to fund them in
postage. There were unexpected checks for English serial rights and for
advance payments on foreign translations. His English agent announced
the sale of German translation rights in three of his books, and
informed him that Swedish editions, from which he could expect nothing
because Sweden was not a party to the Berne Convention, were already on
the market. Then there was a nominal request for his permission for a
Russian translation, that country being likewise outside the Berne
Convention.

He turned to the huge bundle of clippings which had come in from his
press bureau, and read about himself and his vogue, which had become a
furore. All his creative output had been flung to the public in one
magnificent sweep. That seemed to account for it. He had taken the
public off its feet, the way Kipling had, that time when he lay near to
death and all the mob, animated by a mob-mind thought, began suddenly
to read him. Martin remembered how that same world-mob, having read him
and acclaimed him and not understood him in the least, had, abruptly, a
few months later, flung itself upon him and torn him to pieces. Martin
grinned at the thought. Who was he that he should not be similarly
treated in a few more months? Well, he would fool the mob. He would be
away, in the South Seas, building his grass house, trading for pearls
and copra, jumping reefs in frail outriggers, catching sharks and
bonitas, hunting wild goats among the cliffs of the valley that lay
next to the valley of Taiohae.

In the moment of that thought the desperateness of his situation dawned
upon him. He saw, cleared eyed, that he was in the Valley of the
Shadow. All the life that was in him was fading, fainting, making
toward death.

He realized how much he slept, and how much he desired to sleep. Of
old, he had hated sleep. It had robbed him of precious moments of
living. Four hours of sleep in the twenty-four had meant being robbed
of four hours of life. How he had grudged sleep! Now it was life he
grudged. Life was not good; its taste in his mouth was without tang,
and bitter. This was his peril. Life that did not yearn toward life was
in fair way toward ceasing. Some remote instinct for preservation
stirred in him, and he knew he must get away. He glanced about the
room, and the thought of packing was burdensome. Perhaps it would be
better to leave that to the last. In the meantime he might be getting
an outfit.

He put on his hat and went out, stopping in at a gun-store, where he
spent the remainder of the morning buying automatic rifles, ammunition,
and fishing tackle. Fashions changed in trading, and he knew he would
have to wait till he reached Tahiti before ordering his trade-goods.
They could come up from Australia, anyway. This solution was a source
of pleasure. He had avoided doing something, and the doing of anything
just now was unpleasant. He went back to the hotel gladly, with a
feeling of satisfaction in that the comfortable Morris chair was
waiting for him; and he groaned inwardly, on entering his room, at
sight of Joe in the Morris chair.

Joe was delighted with the laundry. Everything was settled, and he
would enter into possession next day. Martin lay on the bed, with
closed eyes, while the other talked on. Martin’s thoughts were far
away—so far away that he was rarely aware that he was thinking. It was
only by an effort that he occasionally responded. And yet this was Joe,
whom he had always liked. But Joe was too keen with life. The
boisterous impact of it on Martin’s jaded mind was a hurt. It was an
aching probe to his tired sensitiveness. When Joe reminded him that
sometime in the future they were going to put on the gloves together,
he could almost have screamed.

“Remember, Joe, you’re to run the laundry according to those old rules
you used to lay down at Shelly Hot Springs,” he said. “No overworking.
No working at night. And no children at the mangles. No children
anywhere. And a fair wage.”

Joe nodded and pulled out a note-book.

“Look at here. I was workin’ out them rules before breakfast this A.M.
What d’ye think of them?”

He read them aloud, and Martin approved, worrying at the same time as
to when Joe would take himself off.

It was late afternoon when he awoke. Slowly the fact of life came back
to him. He glanced about the room. Joe had evidently stolen away after
he had dozed off. That was considerate of Joe, he thought. Then he
closed his eyes and slept again.

In the days that followed Joe was too busy organizing and taking hold
of the laundry to bother him much; and it was not until the day before
sailing that the newspapers made the announcement that he had taken
passage on the _Mariposa_. Once, when the instinct of preservation
fluttered, he went to a doctor and underwent a searching physical
examination. Nothing could be found the matter with him. His heart and
lungs were pronounced magnificent. Every organ, so far as the doctor
could know, was normal and was working normally.

“There is nothing the matter with you, Mr. Eden,” he said, “positively
nothing the matter with you. You are in the pink of condition.
Candidly, I envy you your health. It is superb. Look at that chest.
There, and in your stomach, lies the secret of your remarkable
constitution. Physically, you are a man in a thousand—in ten thousand.
Barring accidents, you should live to be a hundred.”

And Martin knew that Lizzie’s diagnosis had been correct. Physically he
was all right. It was his “think-machine” that had gone wrong, and
there was no cure for that except to get away to the South Seas. The
trouble was that now, on the verge of departure, he had no desire to
go. The South Seas charmed him no more than did bourgeois civilization.
There was no zest in the thought of departure, while the act of
departure appalled him as a weariness of the flesh. He would have felt
better if he were already on board and gone.

The last day was a sore trial. Having read of his sailing in the
morning papers, Bernard Higginbotham, Gertrude, and all the family came
to say good-by, as did Hermann von Schmidt and Marian. Then there was
business to be transacted, bills to be paid, and everlasting reporters
to be endured. He said good-by to Lizzie Connolly, abruptly, at the
entrance to night school, and hurried away. At the hotel he found Joe,
too busy all day with the laundry to have come to him earlier. It was
the last straw, but Martin gripped the arms of his chair and talked and
listened for half an hour.

“You know, Joe,” he said, “that you are not tied down to that laundry.
There are no strings on it. You can sell it any time and blow the
money. Any time you get sick of it and want to hit the road, just pull
out. Do what will make you the happiest.”

Joe shook his head.

“No more road in mine, thank you kindly. Hoboin’s all right, exceptin’
for one thing—the girls. I can’t help it, but I’m a ladies’ man. I
can’t get along without ’em, and you’ve got to get along without ’em
when you’re hoboin’. The times I’ve passed by houses where dances an’
parties was goin’ on, an’ heard the women laugh, an’ saw their white
dresses and smiling faces through the windows—Gee! I tell you them
moments was plain hell. I like dancin’ an’ picnics, an’ walking in the
moonlight, an’ all the rest too well. Me for the laundry, and a good
front, with big iron dollars clinkin’ in my jeans. I seen a girl
already, just yesterday, and, d’ye know, I’m feelin’ already I’d just
as soon marry her as not. I’ve ben whistlin’ all day at the thought of
it. She’s a beaut, with the kindest eyes and softest voice you ever
heard. Me for her, you can stack on that. Say, why don’t you get
married with all this money to burn? You could get the finest girl in
the land.”

Martin shook his head with a smile, but in his secret heart he was
wondering why any man wanted to marry. It seemed an amazing and
incomprehensible thing.

From the deck of the _Mariposa_, at the sailing hour, he saw Lizzie
Connolly hiding in the skirts of the crowd on the wharf. Take her with
you, came the thought. It is easy to be kind. She will be supremely
happy. It was almost a temptation one moment, and the succeeding moment
it became a terror. He was in a panic at the thought of it. His tired
soul cried out in protest. He turned away from the rail with a groan,
muttering, “Man, you are too sick, you are too sick.”

He fled to his stateroom, where he lurked until the steamer was clear
of the dock. In the dining saloon, at luncheon, he found himself in the
place of honor, at the captain’s right; and he was not long in
discovering that he was the great man on board. But no more
unsatisfactory great man ever sailed on a ship. He spent the afternoon
in a deck-chair, with closed eyes, dozing brokenly most of the time,
and in the evening went early to bed.

After the second day, recovered from seasickness, the full passenger
list was in evidence, and the more he saw of the passengers the more he
disliked them. Yet he knew that he did them injustice. They were good
and kindly people, he forced himself to acknowledge, and in the moment
of acknowledgment he qualified—good and kindly like all the
bourgeoisie, with all the psychological cramp and intellectual futility
of their kind, they bored him when they talked with him, their little
superficial minds were so filled with emptiness; while the boisterous
high spirits and the excessive energy of the younger people shocked
him. They were never quiet, ceaselessly playing deck-quoits, tossing
rings, promenading, or rushing to the rail with loud cries to watch the
leaping porpoises and the first schools of flying fish.

He slept much. After breakfast he sought his deck-chair with a magazine
he never finished. The printed pages tired him. He puzzled that men
found so much to write about, and, puzzling, dozed in his chair. When
the gong awoke him for luncheon, he was irritated that he must awaken.
There was no satisfaction in being awake.

Once, he tried to arouse himself from his lethargy, and went forward
into the forecastle with the sailors. But the breed of sailors seemed
to have changed since the days he had lived in the forecastle. He could
find no kinship with these stolid-faced, ox-minded bestial creatures.
He was in despair. Up above nobody had wanted Martin Eden for his own
sake, and he could not go back to those of his own class who had wanted
him in the past. He did not want them. He could not stand them any more
than he could stand the stupid first-cabin passengers and the riotous
young people.

Life was to him like strong, white light that hurts the tired eyes of a
sick person. During every conscious moment life blazed in a raw glare
around him and upon him. It hurt. It hurt intolerably. It was the first
time in his life that Martin had travelled first class. On ships at sea
he had always been in the forecastle, the steerage, or in the black
depths of the coal-hold, passing coal. In those days, climbing up the
iron ladders out the pit of stifling heat, he had often caught glimpses
of the passengers, in cool white, doing nothing but enjoy themselves,
under awnings spread to keep the sun and wind away from them, with
subservient stewards taking care of their every want and whim, and it
had seemed to him that the realm in which they moved and had their
being was nothing else than paradise. Well, here he was, the great man
on board, in the midmost centre of it, sitting at the captain’s right
hand, and yet vainly harking back to forecastle and stoke-hole in quest
of the Paradise he had lost. He had found no new one, and now he could
not find the old one.

He strove to stir himself and find something to interest him. He
ventured the petty officers’ mess, and was glad to get away. He talked
with a quartermaster off duty, an intelligent man who promptly prodded
him with the socialist propaganda and forced into his hands a bunch of
leaflets and pamphlets. He listened to the man expounding the
slave-morality, and as he listened, he thought languidly of his own
Nietzsche philosophy. But what was it worth, after all? He remembered
one of Nietzsche’s mad utterances wherein that madman had doubted
truth. And who was to say? Perhaps Nietzsche had been right. Perhaps
there was no truth in anything, no truth in truth—no such thing as
truth. But his mind wearied quickly, and he was content to go back to
his chair and doze.

Miserable as he was on the steamer, a new misery came upon him. What
when the steamer reached Tahiti? He would have to go ashore. He would
have to order his trade-goods, to find a passage on a schooner to the
Marquesas, to do a thousand and one things that were awful to
contemplate. Whenever he steeled himself deliberately to think, he
could see the desperate peril in which he stood. In all truth, he was
in the Valley of the Shadow, and his danger lay in that he was not
afraid. If he were only afraid, he would make toward life. Being
unafraid, he was drifting deeper into the shadow. He found no delight
in the old familiar things of life. The _Mariposa_ was now in the
northeast trades, and this wine of wind, surging against him, irritated
him. He had his chair moved to escape the embrace of this lusty comrade
of old days and nights.

The day the _Mariposa_ entered the doldrums, Martin was more miserable
than ever. He could no longer sleep. He was soaked with sleep, and
perforce he must now stay awake and endure the white glare of life. He
moved about restlessly. The air was sticky and humid, and the
rain-squalls were unrefreshing. He ached with life. He walked around
the deck until that hurt too much, then sat in his chair until he was
compelled to walk again. He forced himself at last to finish the
magazine, and from the steamer library he culled several volumes of
poetry. But they could not hold him, and once more he took to walking.

He stayed late on deck, after dinner, but that did not help him, for
when he went below, he could not sleep. This surcease from life had
failed him. It was too much. He turned on the electric light and tried
to read. One of the volumes was a Swinburne. He lay in bed, glancing
through its pages, until suddenly he became aware that he was reading
with interest. He finished the stanza, attempted to read on, then came
back to it. He rested the book face downward on his breast and fell to
thinking. That was it. The very thing. Strange that it had never come
to him before. That was the meaning of it all; he had been drifting
that way all the time, and now Swinburne showed him that it was the
happy way out. He wanted rest, and here was rest awaiting him. He
glanced at the open port-hole. Yes, it was large enough. For the first
time in weeks he felt happy. At last he had discovered the cure of his
ill. He picked up the book and read the stanza slowly aloud:-

“‘From too much love of living,
    From hope and fear set free,
We thank with brief thanksgiving
    Whatever gods may be
That no life lives forever;
That dead men rise up never;
    That even the weariest river
    Winds somewhere safe to sea.’”


He looked again at the open port. Swinburne had furnished the key. Life
was ill, or, rather, it had become ill—an unbearable thing. “That dead
men rise up never!” That line stirred him with a profound feeling of
gratitude. It was the one beneficent thing in the universe. When life
became an aching weariness, death was ready to soothe away to
everlasting sleep. But what was he waiting for? It was time to go.

He arose and thrust his head out the port-hole, looking down into the
milky wash. The _Mariposa_ was deeply loaded, and, hanging by his
hands, his feet would be in the water. He could slip in noiselessly. No
one would hear. A smother of spray dashed up, wetting his face. It
tasted salt on his lips, and the taste was good. He wondered if he
ought to write a swan-song, but laughed the thought away. There was no
time. He was too impatient to be gone.

Turning off the light in his room so that it might not betray him, he
went out the port-hole feet first. His shoulders stuck, and he forced
himself back so as to try it with one arm down by his side. A roll of
the steamer aided him, and he was through, hanging by his hands. When
his feet touched the sea, he let go. He was in a milky froth of water.
The side of the _Mariposa_ rushed past him like a dark wall, broken
here and there by lighted ports. She was certainly making time. Almost
before he knew it, he was astern, swimming gently on the foam-crackling
surface.

A bonita struck at his white body, and he laughed aloud. It had taken a
piece out, and the sting of it reminded him of why he was there. In the
work to do he had forgotten the purpose of it. The lights of the
_Mariposa_ were growing dim in the distance, and there he was, swimming
confidently, as though it were his intention to make for the nearest
land a thousand miles or so away.

It was the automatic instinct to live. He ceased swimming, but the
moment he felt the water rising above his mouth the hands struck out
sharply with a lifting movement. The will to live, was his thought, and
the thought was accompanied by a sneer. Well, he had will,—ay, will
strong enough that with one last exertion it could destroy itself and
cease to be.

He changed his position to a vertical one. He glanced up at the quiet
stars, at the same time emptying his lungs of air. With swift, vigorous
propulsion of hands and feet, he lifted his shoulders and half his
chest out of water. This was to gain impetus for the descent. Then he
let himself go and sank without movement, a white statue, into the sea.
He breathed in the water deeply, deliberately, after the manner of a
man taking an anaesthetic. When he strangled, quite involuntarily his
arms and legs clawed the water and drove him up to the surface and into
the clear sight of the stars.

The will to live, he thought disdainfully, vainly endeavoring not to
breathe the air into his bursting lungs. Well, he would have to try a
new way. He filled his lungs with air, filled them full. This supply
would take him far down. He turned over and went down head first,
swimming with all his strength and all his will. Deeper and deeper he
went. His eyes were open, and he watched the ghostly, phosphorescent
trails of the darting bonita. As he swam, he hoped that they would not
strike at him, for it might snap the tension of his will. But they did
not strike, and he found time to be grateful for this last kindness of
life.

Down, down, he swam till his arms and legs grew tired and hardly moved.
He knew that he was deep. The pressure on his ear-drums was a pain, and
there was a buzzing in his head. His endurance was faltering, but he
compelled his arms and legs to drive him deeper until his will snapped
and the air drove from his lungs in a great explosive rush. The bubbles
rubbed and bounded like tiny balloons against his cheeks and eyes as
they took their upward flight. Then came pain and strangulation. This
hurt was not death, was the thought that oscillated through his reeling
consciousness. Death did not hurt. It was life, the pangs of life, this
awful, suffocating feeling; it was the last blow life could deal him.

His wilful hands and feet began to beat and churn about, spasmodically
and feebly. But he had fooled them and the will to live that made them
beat and churn. He was too deep down. They could never bring him to the
surface. He seemed floating languidly in a sea of dreamy vision. Colors
and radiances surrounded him and bathed him and pervaded him. What was
that? It seemed a lighthouse; but it was inside his brain—a flashing,
bright white light. It flashed swifter and swifter. There was a long
rumble of sound, and it seemed to him that he was falling down a vast
and interminable stairway. And somewhere at the bottom he fell into
darkness. That much he knew. He had fallen into darkness. And at the
instant he knew, he ceased to know.

CHAPTER I


I scarcely know where to begin, though I sometimes facetiously place the
cause of it all to Charley Furuseth’s credit.  He kept a summer cottage
in Mill Valley, under the shadow of Mount Tamalpais, and never occupied
it except when he loafed through the winter months and read Nietzsche and
Schopenhauer to rest his brain.  When summer came on, he elected to sweat
out a hot and dusty existence in the city and to toil incessantly.  Had
it not been my custom to run up to see him every Saturday afternoon and
to stop over till Monday morning, this particular January Monday morning
would not have found me afloat on San Francisco Bay.

Not but that I was afloat in a safe craft, for the _Martinez_ was a new
ferry-steamer, making her fourth or fifth trip on the run between
Sausalito and San Francisco.  The danger lay in the heavy fog which
blanketed the bay, and of which, as a landsman, I had little
apprehension.  In fact, I remember the placid exaltation with which I
took up my position on the forward upper deck, directly beneath the
pilot-house, and allowed the mystery of the fog to lay hold of my
imagination.  A fresh breeze was blowing, and for a time I was alone in
the moist obscurity—yet not alone, for I was dimly conscious of the
presence of the pilot, and of what I took to be the captain, in the glass
house above my head.

I remember thinking how comfortable it was, this division of labour which
made it unnecessary for me to study fogs, winds, tides, and navigation,
in order to visit my friend who lived across an arm of the sea.  It was
good that men should be specialists, I mused.  The peculiar knowledge of
the pilot and captain sufficed for many thousands of people who knew no
more of the sea and navigation than I knew.  On the other hand, instead
of having to devote my energy to the learning of a multitude of things, I
concentrated it upon a few particular things, such as, for instance, the
analysis of Poe’s place in American literature—an essay of mine, by the
way, in the current _Atlantic_.  Coming aboard, as I passed through the
cabin, I had noticed with greedy eyes a stout gentleman reading the
_Atlantic_, which was open at my very essay.  And there it was again, the
division of labour, the special knowledge of the pilot and captain which
permitted the stout gentleman to read my special knowledge on Poe while
they carried him safely from Sausalito to San Francisco.

A red-faced man, slamming the cabin door behind him and stumping out on
the deck, interrupted my reflections, though I made a mental note of the
topic for use in a projected essay which I had thought of calling “The
Necessity for Freedom: A Plea for the Artist.”  The red-faced man shot a
glance up at the pilot-house, gazed around at the fog, stumped across the
deck and back (he evidently had artificial legs), and stood still by my
side, legs wide apart, and with an expression of keen enjoyment on his
face.  I was not wrong when I decided that his days had been spent on the
sea.

“It’s nasty weather like this here that turns heads grey before their
time,” he said, with a nod toward the pilot-house.

“I had not thought there was any particular strain,” I answered.  “It
seems as simple as A, B, C.  They know the direction by compass, the
distance, and the speed.  I should not call it anything more than
mathematical certainty.”

“Strain!” he snorted.  “Simple as A, B, C!  Mathematical certainty!”

He seemed to brace himself up and lean backward against the air as he
stared at me.  “How about this here tide that’s rushin’ out through the
Golden Gate?” he demanded, or bellowed, rather.  “How fast is she ebbin’?
What’s the drift, eh?  Listen to that, will you?  A bell-buoy, and we’re
a-top of it!  See ’em alterin’ the course!”

From out of the fog came the mournful tolling of a bell, and I could see
the pilot turning the wheel with great rapidity.  The bell, which had
seemed straight ahead, was now sounding from the side.  Our own whistle
was blowing hoarsely, and from time to time the sound of other whistles
came to us from out of the fog.

“That’s a ferry-boat of some sort,” the new-comer said, indicating a
whistle off to the right.  “And there!  D’ye hear that?  Blown by mouth.
Some scow schooner, most likely.  Better watch out, Mr. Schooner-man.
Ah, I thought so.  Now hell’s a poppin’ for somebody!”

The unseen ferry-boat was blowing blast after blast, and the mouth-blown
horn was tooting in terror-stricken fashion.

“And now they’re payin’ their respects to each other and tryin’ to get
clear,” the red-faced man went on, as the hurried whistling ceased.

His face was shining, his eyes flashing with excitement as he translated
into articulate language the speech of the horns and sirens.  “That’s a
steam-siren a-goin’ it over there to the left.  And you hear that fellow
with a frog in his throat—a steam schooner as near as I can judge,
crawlin’ in from the Heads against the tide.”

A shrill little whistle, piping as if gone mad, came from directly ahead
and from very near at hand.  Gongs sounded on the _Martinez_.  Our
paddle-wheels stopped, their pulsing beat died away, and then they
started again.  The shrill little whistle, like the chirping of a cricket
amid the cries of great beasts, shot through the fog from more to the
side and swiftly grew faint and fainter.  I looked to my companion for
enlightenment.

“One of them dare-devil launches,” he said.  “I almost wish we’d sunk
him, the little rip!  They’re the cause of more trouble.  And what good
are they?  Any jackass gets aboard one and runs it from hell to
breakfast, blowin’ his whistle to beat the band and tellin’ the rest of
the world to look out for him, because he’s comin’ and can’t look out for
himself!  Because he’s comin’!  And you’ve got to look out, too!  Right
of way!  Common decency!  They don’t know the meanin’ of it!”

I felt quite amused at his unwarranted choler, and while he stumped
indignantly up and down I fell to dwelling upon the romance of the fog.
And romantic it certainly was—the fog, like the grey shadow of infinite
mystery, brooding over the whirling speck of earth; and men, mere motes
of light and sparkle, cursed with an insane relish for work, riding their
steeds of wood and steel through the heart of the mystery, groping their
way blindly through the Unseen, and clamouring and clanging in confident
speech the while their hearts are heavy with incertitude and fear.

The voice of my companion brought me back to myself with a laugh.  I too
had been groping and floundering, the while I thought I rode clear-eyed
through the mystery.

“Hello! somebody comin’ our way,” he was saying.  “And d’ye hear that?
He’s comin’ fast.  Walking right along.  Guess he don’t hear us yet.
Wind’s in wrong direction.”

The fresh breeze was blowing right down upon us, and I could hear the
whistle plainly, off to one side and a little ahead.

“Ferry-boat?” I asked.

He nodded, then added, “Or he wouldn’t be keepin’ up such a clip.”  He
gave a short chuckle.  “They’re gettin’ anxious up there.”

I glanced up.  The captain had thrust his head and shoulders out of the
pilot-house, and was staring intently into the fog as though by sheer
force of will he could penetrate it.  His face was anxious, as was the
face of my companion, who had stumped over to the rail and was gazing
with a like intentness in the direction of the invisible danger.

Then everything happened, and with inconceivable rapidity.  The fog
seemed to break away as though split by a wedge, and the bow of a
steamboat emerged, trailing fog-wreaths on either side like seaweed on
the snout of Leviathan.  I could see the pilot-house and a white-bearded
man leaning partly out of it, on his elbows.  He was clad in a blue
uniform, and I remember noting how trim and quiet he was.  His quietness,
under the circumstances, was terrible.  He accepted Destiny, marched hand
in hand with it, and coolly measured the stroke.  As he leaned there, he
ran a calm and speculative eye over us, as though to determine the
precise point of the collision, and took no notice whatever when our
pilot, white with rage, shouted, “Now you’ve done it!”

On looking back, I realize that the remark was too obvious to make
rejoinder necessary.

“Grab hold of something and hang on,” the red-faced man said to me.  All
his bluster had gone, and he seemed to have caught the contagion of
preternatural calm.  “And listen to the women scream,” he said
grimly—almost bitterly, I thought, as though he had been through the
experience before.

The vessels came together before I could follow his advice.  We must have
been struck squarely amidships, for I saw nothing, the strange steamboat
having passed beyond my line of vision.  The _Martinez_ heeled over,
sharply, and there was a crashing and rending of timber.  I was thrown
flat on the wet deck, and before I could scramble to my feet I heard the
scream of the women.  This it was, I am certain,—the most indescribable
of blood-curdling sounds,—that threw me into a panic.  I remembered the
life-preservers stored in the cabin, but was met at the door and swept
backward by a wild rush of men and women.  What happened in the next few
minutes I do not recollect, though I have a clear remembrance of pulling
down life-preservers from the overhead racks, while the red-faced man
fastened them about the bodies of an hysterical group of women.  This
memory is as distinct and sharp as that of any picture I have seen.  It
is a picture, and I can see it now,—the jagged edges of the hole in the
side of the cabin, through which the grey fog swirled and eddied; the
empty upholstered seats, littered with all the evidences of sudden
flight, such as packages, hand satchels, umbrellas, and wraps; the stout
gentleman who had been reading my essay, encased in cork and canvas, the
magazine still in his hand, and asking me with monotonous insistence if I
thought there was any danger; the red-faced man, stumping gallantly
around on his artificial legs and buckling life-preservers on all comers;
and finally, the screaming bedlam of women.

This it was, the screaming of the women, that most tried my nerves.  It
must have tried, too, the nerves of the red-faced man, for I have another
picture which will never fade from my mind.  The stout gentleman is
stuffing the magazine into his overcoat pocket and looking on curiously.
A tangled mass of women, with drawn, white faces and open mouths, is
shrieking like a chorus of lost souls; and the red-faced man, his face
now purplish with wrath, and with arms extended overhead as in the act of
hurling thunderbolts, is shouting, “Shut up!  Oh, shut up!”

I remember the scene impelled me to sudden laughter, and in the next
instant I realized I was becoming hysterical myself; for these were women
of my own kind, like my mother and sisters, with the fear of death upon
them and unwilling to die.  And I remember that the sounds they made
reminded me of the squealing of pigs under the knife of the butcher, and
I was struck with horror at the vividness of the analogy.  These women,
capable of the most sublime emotions, of the tenderest sympathies, were
open-mouthed and screaming.  They wanted to live, they were helpless,
like rats in a trap, and they screamed.

The horror of it drove me out on deck.  I was feeling sick and squeamish,
and sat down on a bench.  In a hazy way I saw and heard men rushing and
shouting as they strove to lower the boats.  It was just as I had read
descriptions of such scenes in books.  The tackles jammed.  Nothing
worked.  One boat lowered away with the plugs out, filled with women and
children and then with water, and capsized.  Another boat had been
lowered by one end, and still hung in the tackle by the other end, where
it had been abandoned.  Nothing was to be seen of the strange steamboat
which had caused the disaster, though I heard men saying that she would
undoubtedly send boats to our assistance.

I descended to the lower deck.  The _Martinez_ was sinking fast, for the
water was very near.  Numbers of the passengers were leaping overboard.
Others, in the water, were clamouring to be taken aboard again.  No one
heeded them.  A cry arose that we were sinking.  I was seized by the
consequent panic, and went over the side in a surge of bodies.  How I
went over I do not know, though I did know, and instantly, why those in
the water were so desirous of getting back on the steamer.  The water was
cold—so cold that it was painful.  The pang, as I plunged into it, was as
quick and sharp as that of fire.  It bit to the marrow.  It was like the
grip of death.  I gasped with the anguish and shock of it, filling my
lungs before the life-preserver popped me to the surface.  The taste of
the salt was strong in my mouth, and I was strangling with the acrid
stuff in my throat and lungs.

But it was the cold that was most distressing.  I felt that I could
survive but a few minutes.  People were struggling and floundering in the
water about me.  I could hear them crying out to one another.  And I
heard, also, the sound of oars.  Evidently the strange steamboat had
lowered its boats.  As the time went by I marvelled that I was still
alive.  I had no sensation whatever in my lower limbs, while a chilling
numbness was wrapping about my heart and creeping into it.  Small waves,
with spiteful foaming crests, continually broke over me and into my
mouth, sending me off into more strangling paroxysms.

The noises grew indistinct, though I heard a final and despairing chorus
of screams in the distance, and knew that the _Martinez_ had gone down.
Later,—how much later I have no knowledge,—I came to myself with a start
of fear.  I was alone.  I could hear no calls or cries—only the sound of
the waves, made weirdly hollow and reverberant by the fog.  A panic in a
crowd, which partakes of a sort of community of interest, is not so
terrible as a panic when one is by oneself; and such a panic I now
suffered.  Whither was I drifting?  The red-faced man had said that the
tide was ebbing through the Golden Gate.  Was I, then, being carried out
to sea?  And the life-preserver in which I floated?  Was it not liable to
go to pieces at any moment?  I had heard of such things being made of
paper and hollow rushes which quickly became saturated and lost all
buoyancy.  And I could not swim a stroke.  And I was alone, floating,
apparently, in the midst of a grey primordial vastness.  I confess that a
madness seized me, that I shrieked aloud as the women had shrieked, and
beat the water with my numb hands.

How long this lasted I have no conception, for a blankness intervened, of
which I remember no more than one remembers of troubled and painful
sleep.  When I aroused, it was as after centuries of time; and I saw,
almost above me and emerging from the fog, the bow of a vessel, and three
triangular sails, each shrewdly lapping the other and filled with wind.
Where the bow cut the water there was a great foaming and gurgling, and I
seemed directly in its path.  I tried to cry out, but was too exhausted.
The bow plunged down, just missing me and sending a swash of water clear
over my head.  Then the long, black side of the vessel began slipping
past, so near that I could have touched it with my hands.  I tried to
reach it, in a mad resolve to claw into the wood with my nails, but my
arms were heavy and lifeless.  Again I strove to call out, but made no
sound.

The stern of the vessel shot by, dropping, as it did so, into a hollow
between the waves; and I caught a glimpse of a man standing at the wheel,
and of another man who seemed to be doing little else than smoke a cigar.
I saw the smoke issuing from his lips as he slowly turned his head and
glanced out over the water in my direction.  It was a careless,
unpremeditated glance, one of those haphazard things men do when they
have no immediate call to do anything in particular, but act because they
are alive and must do something.

But life and death were in that glance.  I could see the vessel being
swallowed up in the fog; I saw the back of the man at the wheel, and the
head of the other man turning, slowly turning, as his gaze struck the
water and casually lifted along it toward me.  His face wore an absent
expression, as of deep thought, and I became afraid that if his eyes did
light upon me he would nevertheless not see me.  But his eyes did light
upon me, and looked squarely into mine; and he did see me, for he sprang
to the wheel, thrusting the other man aside, and whirled it round and
round, hand over hand, at the same time shouting orders of some sort.
The vessel seemed to go off at a tangent to its former course and leapt
almost instantly from view into the fog.

I felt myself slipping into unconsciousness, and tried with all the power
of my will to fight above the suffocating blankness and darkness that was
rising around me.  A little later I heard the stroke of oars, growing
nearer and nearer, and the calls of a man.  When he was very near I heard
him crying, in vexed fashion, “Why in hell don’t you sing out?”  This
meant me, I thought, and then the blankness and darkness rose over me.




CHAPTER II


I seemed swinging in a mighty rhythm through orbit vastness.  Sparkling
points of light spluttered and shot past me.  They were stars, I knew,
and flaring comets, that peopled my flight among the suns.  As I reached
the limit of my swing and prepared to rush back on the counter swing, a
great gong struck and thundered.  For an immeasurable period, lapped in
the rippling of placid centuries, I enjoyed and pondered my tremendous
flight.

But a change came over the face of the dream, for a dream I told myself
it must be.  My rhythm grew shorter and shorter.  I was jerked from swing
to counter swing with irritating haste.  I could scarcely catch my
breath, so fiercely was I impelled through the heavens.  The gong
thundered more frequently and more furiously.  I grew to await it with a
nameless dread.  Then it seemed as though I were being dragged over
rasping sands, white and hot in the sun.  This gave place to a sense of
intolerable anguish.  My skin was scorching in the torment of fire.  The
gong clanged and knelled.  The sparkling points of light flashed past me
in an interminable stream, as though the whole sidereal system were
dropping into the void.  I gasped, caught my breath painfully, and opened
my eyes.  Two men were kneeling beside me, working over me.  My mighty
rhythm was the lift and forward plunge of a ship on the sea.  The
terrific gong was a frying-pan, hanging on the wall, that rattled and
clattered with each leap of the ship.  The rasping, scorching sands were
a man’s hard hands chafing my naked chest.  I squirmed under the pain of
it, and half lifted my head.  My chest was raw and red, and I could see
tiny blood globules starting through the torn and inflamed cuticle.

“That’ll do, Yonson,” one of the men said.  “Carn’t yer see you’ve
bloomin’ well rubbed all the gent’s skin orf?”

The man addressed as Yonson, a man of the heavy Scandinavian type, ceased
chafing me, and arose awkwardly to his feet.  The man who had spoken to
him was clearly a Cockney, with the clean lines and weakly pretty, almost
effeminate, face of the man who has absorbed the sound of Bow Bells with
his mother’s milk.  A draggled muslin cap on his head and a dirty
gunny-sack about his slim hips proclaimed him cook of the decidedly dirty
ship’s galley in which I found myself.

“An’ ’ow yer feelin’ now, sir?” he asked, with the subservient smirk
which comes only of generations of tip-seeking ancestors.

For reply, I twisted weakly into a sitting posture, and was helped by
Yonson to my feet.  The rattle and bang of the frying-pan was grating
horribly on my nerves.  I could not collect my thoughts.  Clutching the
woodwork of the galley for support,—and I confess the grease with which
it was scummed put my teeth on edge,—I reached across a hot cooking-range
to the offending utensil, unhooked it, and wedged it securely into the
coal-box.

The cook grinned at my exhibition of nerves, and thrust into my hand a
steaming mug with an “’Ere, this’ll do yer good.”  It was a nauseous
mess,—ship’s coffee,—but the heat of it was revivifying.  Between gulps
of the molten stuff I glanced down at my raw and bleeding chest and
turned to the Scandinavian.

“Thank you, Mr. Yonson,” I said; “but don’t you think your measures were
rather heroic?”

It was because he understood the reproof of my action, rather than of my
words, that he held up his palm for inspection.  It was remarkably
calloused.  I passed my hand over the horny projections, and my teeth
went on edge once more from the horrible rasping sensation produced.

“My name is Johnson, not Yonson,” he said, in very good, though slow,
English, with no more than a shade of accent to it.

There was mild protest in his pale blue eyes, and withal a timid
frankness and manliness that quite won me to him.

“Thank you, Mr. Johnson,” I corrected, and reached out my hand for his.

He hesitated, awkward and bashful, shifted his weight from one leg to the
other, then blunderingly gripped my hand in a hearty shake.

“Have you any dry clothes I may put on?” I asked the cook.

“Yes, sir,” he answered, with cheerful alacrity.  “I’ll run down an’ tyke
a look over my kit, if you’ve no objections, sir, to wearin’ my things.”

He dived out of the galley door, or glided rather, with a swiftness and
smoothness of gait that struck me as being not so much cat-like as oily.
In fact, this oiliness, or greasiness, as I was later to learn, was
probably the most salient expression of his personality.

“And where am I?” I asked Johnson, whom I took, and rightly, to be one of
the sailors.  “What vessel is this, and where is she bound?”

“Off the Farallones, heading about sou-west,” he answered, slowly and
methodically, as though groping for his best English, and rigidly
observing the order of my queries.  “The schooner _Ghost_, bound
seal-hunting to Japan.”

“And who is the captain?  I must see him as soon as I am dressed.”

Johnson looked puzzled and embarrassed.  He hesitated while he groped in
his vocabulary and framed a complete answer.  “The cap’n is Wolf Larsen,
or so men call him.  I never heard his other name.  But you better speak
soft with him.  He is mad this morning.  The mate—”

But he did not finish.  The cook had glided in.

“Better sling yer ’ook out of ’ere, Yonson,” he said.  “The old man’ll be
wantin’ yer on deck, an’ this ayn’t no d’y to fall foul of ’im.”

Johnson turned obediently to the door, at the same time, over the cook’s
shoulder, favouring me with an amazingly solemn and portentous wink as
though to emphasize his interrupted remark and the need for me to be
soft-spoken with the captain.

Hanging over the cook’s arm was a loose and crumpled array of
evil-looking and sour-smelling garments.

“They was put aw’y wet, sir,” he vouchsafed explanation.  “But you’ll
’ave to make them do till I dry yours out by the fire.”

Clinging to the woodwork, staggering with the roll of the ship, and aided
by the cook, I managed to slip into a rough woollen undershirt.  On the
instant my flesh was creeping and crawling from the harsh contact.  He
noticed my involuntary twitching and grimacing, and smirked:

“I only ’ope yer don’t ever ’ave to get used to such as that in this
life, ’cos you’ve got a bloomin’ soft skin, that you ’ave, more like a
lydy’s than any I know of.  I was bloomin’ well sure you was a gentleman
as soon as I set eyes on yer.”

I had taken a dislike to him at first, and as he helped to dress me this
dislike increased.  There was something repulsive about his touch.  I
shrank from his hand; my flesh revolted.  And between this and the smells
arising from various pots boiling and bubbling on the galley fire, I was
in haste to get out into the fresh air.  Further, there was the need of
seeing the captain about what arrangements could be made for getting me
ashore.

A cheap cotton shirt, with frayed collar and a bosom discoloured with
what I took to be ancient blood-stains, was put on me amid a running and
apologetic fire of comment.  A pair of workman’s brogans encased my feet,
and for trousers I was furnished with a pair of pale blue, washed-out
overalls, one leg of which was fully ten inches shorter than the other.
The abbreviated leg looked as though the devil had there clutched for the
Cockney’s soul and missed the shadow for the substance.

“And whom have I to thank for this kindness?” I asked, when I stood
completely arrayed, a tiny boy’s cap on my head, and for coat a dirty,
striped cotton jacket which ended at the small of my back and the sleeves
of which reached just below my elbows.

The cook drew himself up in a smugly humble fashion, a deprecating smirk
on his face.  Out of my experience with stewards on the Atlantic liners
at the end of the voyage, I could have sworn he was waiting for his tip.
From my fuller knowledge of the creature I now know that the posture was
unconscious.  An hereditary servility, no doubt, was responsible.

“Mugridge, sir,” he fawned, his effeminate features running into a greasy
smile.  “Thomas Mugridge, sir, an’ at yer service.”

“All right, Thomas,” I said.  “I shall not forget you—when my clothes are
dry.”

A soft light suffused his face and his eyes glistened, as though
somewhere in the deeps of his being his ancestors had quickened and
stirred with dim memories of tips received in former lives.

“Thank you, sir,” he said, very gratefully and very humbly indeed.

Precisely in the way that the door slid back, he slid aside, and I
stepped out on deck.  I was still weak from my prolonged immersion.  A
puff of wind caught me,—and I staggered across the moving deck to a
corner of the cabin, to which I clung for support.  The schooner, heeled
over far out from the perpendicular, was bowing and plunging into the
long Pacific roll.  If she were heading south-west as Johnson had said,
the wind, then, I calculated, was blowing nearly from the south.  The fog
was gone, and in its place the sun sparkled crisply on the surface of the
water. I turned to the east, where I knew California must lie, but could
see nothing save low-lying fog-banks—the same fog, doubtless, that had
brought about the disaster to the _Martinez_ and placed me in my present
situation.  To the north, and not far away, a group of naked rocks thrust
above the sea, on one of which I could distinguish a lighthouse.  In the
south-west, and almost in our course, I saw the pyramidal loom of some
vessel’s sails.

Having completed my survey of the horizon, I turned to my more immediate
surroundings.  My first thought was that a man who had come through a
collision and rubbed shoulders with death merited more attention than I
received.  Beyond a sailor at the wheel who stared curiously across the
top of the cabin, I attracted no notice whatever.

Everybody seemed interested in what was going on amid ships.  There, on a
hatch, a large man was lying on his back.  He was fully clothed, though
his shirt was ripped open in front.  Nothing was to be seen of his chest,
however, for it was covered with a mass of black hair, in appearance like
the furry coat of a dog.  His face and neck were hidden beneath a black
beard, intershot with grey, which would have been stiff and bushy had it
not been limp and draggled and dripping with water.  His eyes were
closed, and he was apparently unconscious; but his mouth was wide open,
his breast, heaving as though from suffocation as he laboured noisily for
breath.  A sailor, from time to time and quite methodically, as a matter
of routine, dropped a canvas bucket into the ocean at the end of a rope,
hauled it in hand under hand, and sluiced its contents over the prostrate
man.

Pacing back and forth the length of the hatchways and savagely chewing
the end of a cigar, was the man whose casual glance had rescued me from
the sea.  His height was probably five feet ten inches, or ten and a
half; but my first impression, or feel of the man, was not of this, but
of his strength.  And yet, while he was of massive build, with broad
shoulders and deep chest, I could not characterize his strength as
massive.  It was what might be termed a sinewy, knotty strength, of the
kind we ascribe to lean and wiry men, but which, in him, because of his
heavy build, partook more of the enlarged gorilla order.  Not that in
appearance he seemed in the least gorilla-like.  What I am striving to
express is this strength itself, more as a thing apart from his physical
semblance.  It was a strength we are wont to associate with things
primitive, with wild animals, and the creatures we imagine our
tree-dwelling prototypes to have been—a strength savage, ferocious, alive
in itself, the essence of life in that it is the potency of motion, the
elemental stuff itself out of which the many forms of life have been
moulded; in short, that which writhes in the body of a snake when the
head is cut off, and the snake, as a snake, is dead, or which lingers in
the shapeless lump of turtle-meat and recoils and quivers from the prod
of a finger.

Such was the impression of strength I gathered from this man who paced up
and down.  He was firmly planted on his legs; his feet struck the deck
squarely and with surety; every movement of a muscle, from the heave of
the shoulders to the tightening of the lips about the cigar, was
decisive, and seemed to come out of a strength that was excessive and
overwhelming.  In fact, though this strength pervaded every action of
his, it seemed but the advertisement of a greater strength that lurked
within, that lay dormant and no more than stirred from time to time, but
which might arouse, at any moment, terrible and compelling, like the rage
of a lion or the wrath of a storm.

The cook stuck his head out of the galley door and grinned encouragingly
at me, at the same time jerking his thumb in the direction of the man who
paced up and down by the hatchway.  Thus I was given to understand that
he was the captain, the “Old Man,” in the cook’s vernacular, the
individual whom I must interview and put to the trouble of somehow
getting me ashore.  I had half started forward, to get over with what I
was certain would be a stormy five minutes, when a more violent
suffocating paroxysm seized the unfortunate person who was lying on his
back.  He wrenched and writhed about convulsively.  The chin, with the
damp black beard, pointed higher in the air as the back muscles stiffened
and the chest swelled in an unconscious and instinctive effort to get
more air.  Under the whiskers, and all unseen, I knew that the skin was
taking on a purplish hue.

The captain, or Wolf Larsen, as men called him, ceased pacing and gazed
down at the dying man.  So fierce had this final struggle become that the
sailor paused in the act of flinging more water over him and stared
curiously, the canvas bucket partly tilted and dripping its contents to
the deck.  The dying man beat a tattoo on the hatch with his heels,
straightened out his legs, and stiffened in one great tense effort, and
rolled his head from side to side.  Then the muscles relaxed, the head
stopped rolling, and a sigh, as of profound relief, floated upward from
his lips.  The jaw dropped, the upper lip lifted, and two rows of
tobacco-discoloured teeth appeared.  It seemed as though his features had
frozen into a diabolical grin at the world he had left and outwitted.

Then a most surprising thing occurred.  The captain broke loose upon the
dead man like a thunderclap.  Oaths rolled from his lips in a continuous
stream.  And they were not namby-pamby oaths, or mere expressions of
indecency.  Each word was a blasphemy, and there were many words.  They
crisped and crackled like electric sparks.  I had never heard anything
like it in my life, nor could I have conceived it possible.  With a turn
for literary expression myself, and a penchant for forcible figures and
phrases, I appreciated, as no other listener, I dare say, the peculiar
vividness and strength and absolute blasphemy of his metaphors.  The
cause of it all, as near as I could make out, was that the man, who was
mate, had gone on a debauch before leaving San Francisco, and then had
the poor taste to die at the beginning of the voyage and leave Wolf
Larsen short-handed.

It should be unnecessary to state, at least to my friends, that I was
shocked.  Oaths and vile language of any sort had always been repellent
to me.  I felt a wilting sensation, a sinking at the heart, and, I might
just as well say, a giddiness.  To me, death had always been invested
with solemnity and dignity.  It had been peaceful in its occurrence,
sacred in its ceremonial.  But death in its more sordid and terrible
aspects was a thing with which I had been unacquainted till now.  As I
say, while I appreciated the power of the terrific denunciation that
swept out of Wolf Larsen’s mouth, I was inexpressibly shocked.  The
scorching torrent was enough to wither the face of the corpse.  I should
not have been surprised if the wet black beard had frizzled and curled
and flared up in smoke and flame.  But the dead man was unconcerned.  He
continued to grin with a sardonic humour, with a cynical mockery and
defiance.  He was master of the situation.




CHAPTER III


Wolf Larsen ceased swearing as suddenly as he had begun.  He relighted
his cigar and glanced around.  His eyes chanced upon the cook.

“Well, Cooky?” he began, with a suaveness that was cold and of the temper
of steel.

“Yes, sir,” the cook eagerly interpolated, with appeasing and apologetic
servility.

“Don’t you think you’ve stretched that neck of yours just about enough?
It’s unhealthy, you know.  The mate’s gone, so I can’t afford to lose you
too.  You must be very, very careful of your health, Cooky.  Understand?”

His last word, in striking contrast with the smoothness of his previous
utterance, snapped like the lash of a whip.  The cook quailed under it.

“Yes, sir,” was the meek reply, as the offending head disappeared into
the galley.

At this sweeping rebuke, which the cook had only pointed, the rest of the
crew became uninterested and fell to work at one task or another.  A
number of men, however, who were lounging about a companion-way between
the galley and hatch, and who did not seem to be sailors, continued
talking in low tones with one another.  These, I afterward learned, were
the hunters, the men who shot the seals, and a very superior breed to
common sailor-folk.

“Johansen!” Wolf Larsen called out.  A sailor stepped forward obediently.
“Get your palm and needle and sew the beggar up.  You’ll find some old
canvas in the sail-locker.  Make it do.”

“What’ll I put on his feet, sir?” the man asked, after the customary “Ay,
ay, sir.”

“We’ll see to that,” Wolf Larsen answered, and elevated his voice in a
call of “Cooky!”

Thomas Mugridge popped out of his galley like a jack-in-the-box.

“Go below and fill a sack with coal.”

“Any of you fellows got a Bible or Prayer-book?” was the captain’s next
demand, this time of the hunters lounging about the companion-way.

They shook their heads, and some one made a jocular remark which I did
not catch, but which raised a general laugh.

Wolf Larsen made the same demand of the sailors.  Bibles and Prayer-books
seemed scarce articles, but one of the men volunteered to pursue the
quest amongst the watch below, returning in a minute with the information
that there was none.

The captain shrugged his shoulders.  “Then we’ll drop him over without
any palavering, unless our clerical-looking castaway has the burial
service at sea by heart.”

By this time he had swung fully around and was facing me.  “You’re a
preacher, aren’t you?” he asked.

The hunters,—there were six of them,—to a man, turned and regarded me.  I
was painfully aware of my likeness to a scarecrow.  A laugh went up at my
appearance,—a laugh that was not lessened or softened by the dead man
stretched and grinning on the deck before us; a laugh that was as rough
and harsh and frank as the sea itself; that arose out of coarse feelings
and blunted sensibilities, from natures that knew neither courtesy nor
gentleness.

Wolf Larsen did not laugh, though his grey eyes lighted with a slight
glint of amusement; and in that moment, having stepped forward quite
close to him, I received my first impression of the man himself, of the
man as apart from his body, and from the torrent of blasphemy I had heard
him spew forth.  The face, with large features and strong lines, of the
square order, yet well filled out, was apparently massive at first sight;
but again, as with the body, the massiveness seemed to vanish, and a
conviction to grow of a tremendous and excessive mental or spiritual
strength that lay behind, sleeping in the deeps of his being.  The jaw,
the chin, the brow rising to a goodly height and swelling heavily above
the eyes,—these, while strong in themselves, unusually strong, seemed to
speak an immense vigour or virility of spirit that lay behind and beyond
and out of sight.  There was no sounding such a spirit, no measuring, no
determining of metes and bounds, nor neatly classifying in some
pigeon-hole with others of similar type.

The eyes—and it was my destiny to know them well—were large and handsome,
wide apart as the true artist’s are wide, sheltering under a heavy brow
and arched over by thick black eyebrows.  The eyes themselves were of
that baffling protean grey which is never twice the same; which runs
through many shades and colourings like intershot silk in sunshine; which
is grey, dark and light, and greenish-grey, and sometimes of the clear
azure of the deep sea.  They were eyes that masked the soul with a
thousand guises, and that sometimes opened, at rare moments, and allowed
it to rush up as though it were about to fare forth nakedly into the
world on some wonderful adventure,—eyes that could brood with the
hopeless sombreness of leaden skies; that could snap and crackle points
of fire like those which sparkle from a whirling sword; that could grow
chill as an arctic landscape, and yet again, that could warm and soften
and be all a-dance with love-lights, intense and masculine, luring and
compelling, which at the same time fascinate and dominate women till they
surrender in a gladness of joy and of relief and sacrifice.

But to return.  I told him that, unhappily for the burial service, I was
not a preacher, when he sharply demanded:

“What do you do for a living?”

I confess I had never had such a question asked me before, nor had I ever
canvassed it.  I was quite taken aback, and before I could find myself
had sillily stammered, “I—I am a gentleman.”

His lip curled in a swift sneer.

“I have worked, I do work,” I cried impetuously, as though he were my
judge and I required vindication, and at the same time very much aware of
my arrant idiocy in discussing the subject at all.

“For your living?”

There was something so imperative and masterful about him that I was
quite beside myself—“rattled,” as Furuseth would have termed it, like a
quaking child before a stern school-master.

“Who feeds you?” was his next question.

“I have an income,” I answered stoutly, and could have bitten my tongue
the next instant.  “All of which, you will pardon my observing, has
nothing whatsoever to do with what I wish to see you about.”

But he disregarded my protest.

“Who earned it?  Eh?  I thought so.  Your father.  You stand on dead
men’s legs.  You’ve never had any of your own.  You couldn’t walk alone
between two sunrises and hustle the meat for your belly for three meals.
Let me see your hand.”

His tremendous, dormant strength must have stirred, swiftly and
accurately, or I must have slept a moment, for before I knew it he had
stepped two paces forward, gripped my right hand in his, and held it up
for inspection.  I tried to withdraw it, but his fingers tightened,
without visible effort, till I thought mine would be crushed.  It is hard
to maintain one’s dignity under such circumstances.  I could not squirm
or struggle like a schoolboy.  Nor could I attack such a creature who had
but to twist my arm to break it.  Nothing remained but to stand still and
accept the indignity.  I had time to notice that the pockets of the dead
man had been emptied on the deck, and that his body and his grin had been
wrapped from view in canvas, the folds of which the sailor, Johansen, was
sewing together with coarse white twine, shoving the needle through with
a leather contrivance fitted on the palm of his hand.

Wolf Larsen dropped my hand with a flirt of disdain.

“Dead men’s hands have kept it soft.  Good for little else than
dish-washing and scullion work.”

“I wish to be put ashore,” I said firmly, for I now had myself in
control.  “I shall pay you whatever you judge your delay and trouble to
be worth.”

He looked at me curiously.  Mockery shone in his eyes.

“I have a counter proposition to make, and for the good of your soul.  My
mate’s gone, and there’ll be a lot of promotion.  A sailor comes aft to
take mate’s place, cabin-boy goes for’ard to take sailor’s place, and you
take the cabin-boy’s place, sign the articles for the cruise, twenty
dollars per month and found.  Now what do you say?  And mind you, it’s
for your own soul’s sake.  It will be the making of you.  You might learn
in time to stand on your own legs, and perhaps to toddle along a bit.”

But I took no notice.  The sails of the vessel I had seen off to the
south-west had grown larger and plainer.  They were of the same
schooner-rig as the _Ghost_, though the hull itself, I could see, was
smaller.  She was a pretty sight, leaping and flying toward us, and
evidently bound to pass at close range.  The wind had been momentarily
increasing, and the sun, after a few angry gleams, had disappeared.  The
sea had turned a dull leaden grey and grown rougher, and was now tossing
foaming whitecaps to the sky.  We were travelling faster, and heeled
farther over.  Once, in a gust, the rail dipped under the sea, and the
decks on that side were for the moment awash with water that made a
couple of the hunters hastily lift their feet.

“That vessel will soon be passing us,” I said, after a moment’s pause.
“As she is going in the opposite direction, she is very probably bound
for San Francisco.”

“Very probably,” was Wolf Larsen’s answer, as he turned partly away from
me and cried out, “Cooky!  Oh, Cooky!”

The Cockney popped out of the galley.

“Where’s that boy?  Tell him I want him.”

“Yes, sir;” and Thomas Mugridge fled swiftly aft and disappeared down
another companion-way near the wheel.  A moment later he emerged, a
heavy-set young fellow of eighteen or nineteen, with a glowering,
villainous countenance, trailing at his heels.

“’Ere ’e is, sir,” the cook said.

But Wolf Larsen ignored that worthy, turning at once to the cabin-boy.

“What’s your name, boy?”

“George Leach, sir,” came the sullen answer, and the boy’s bearing showed
clearly that he divined the reason for which he had been summoned.

“Not an Irish name,” the captain snapped sharply.  “O’Toole or McCarthy
would suit your mug a damn sight better.  Unless, very likely, there’s an
Irishman in your mother’s woodpile.”

I saw the young fellow’s hands clench at the insult, and the blood crawl
scarlet up his neck.

“But let that go,” Wolf Larsen continued.  “You may have very good
reasons for forgetting your name, and I’ll like you none the worse for it
as long as you toe the mark.  Telegraph Hill, of course, is your port of
entry.  It sticks out all over your mug.  Tough as they make them and
twice as nasty.  I know the kind.  Well, you can make up your mind to
have it taken out of you on this craft.  Understand?  Who shipped you,
anyway?”

“McCready and Swanson.”

“Sir!” Wolf Larsen thundered.

“McCready and Swanson, sir,” the boy corrected, his eyes burning with a
bitter light.

“Who got the advance money?”

“They did, sir.”

“I thought as much.  And damned glad you were to let them have it.
Couldn’t make yourself scarce too quick, with several gentlemen you may
have heard of looking for you.”

The boy metamorphosed into a savage on the instant.  His body bunched
together as though for a spring, and his face became as an infuriated
beast’s as he snarled, “It’s a—”

“A what?” Wolf Larsen asked, a peculiar softness in his voice, as though
he were overwhelmingly curious to hear the unspoken word.

The boy hesitated, then mastered his temper.  “Nothin’, sir.  I take it
back.”

“And you have shown me I was right.”  This with a gratified smile.  “How
old are you?”

“Just turned sixteen, sir.”

“A lie.  You’ll never see eighteen again.  Big for your age at that, with
muscles like a horse.  Pack up your kit and go for’ard into the fo’c’sle.
You’re a boat-puller now.  You’re promoted; see?”

Without waiting for the boy’s acceptance, the captain turned to the
sailor who had just finished the gruesome task of sewing up the corpse.
“Johansen, do you know anything about navigation?”

“No, sir.”

“Well, never mind; you’re mate just the same.  Get your traps aft into
the mate’s berth.”

“Ay, ay, sir,” was the cheery response, as Johansen started forward.

In the meantime the erstwhile cabin-boy had not moved.  “What are you
waiting for?” Wolf Larsen demanded.

“I didn’t sign for boat-puller, sir,” was the reply.  “I signed for
cabin-boy.  An’ I don’t want no boat-pullin’ in mine.”

“Pack up and go for’ard.”

This time Wolf Larsen’s command was thrillingly imperative.  The boy
glowered sullenly, but refused to move.

Then came another stirring of Wolf Larsen’s tremendous strength.  It was
utterly unexpected, and it was over and done with between the ticks of
two seconds.  He had sprung fully six feet across the deck and driven his
fist into the other’s stomach.  At the same moment, as though I had been
struck myself, I felt a sickening shock in the pit of my stomach.  I
instance this to show the sensitiveness of my nervous organization at the
time, and how unused I was to spectacles of brutality.  The cabin-boy—and
he weighed one hundred and sixty-five at the very least—crumpled up.  His
body wrapped limply about the fist like a wet rag about a stick.  He
lifted into the air, described a short curve, and struck the deck
alongside the corpse on his head and shoulders, where he lay and writhed
about in agony.

“Well?” Larsen asked of me.  “Have you made up your mind?”

I had glanced occasionally at the approaching schooner, and it was now
almost abreast of us and not more than a couple of hundred yards away.
It was a very trim and neat little craft.  I could see a large, black
number on one of its sails, and I had seen pictures of pilot-boats.

“What vessel is that?” I asked.

“The pilot-boat _Lady Mine_,” Wolf Larsen answered grimly.  “Got rid of
her pilots and running into San Francisco.  She’ll be there in five or
six hours with this wind.”

“Will you please signal it, then, so that I may be put ashore.”

“Sorry, but I’ve lost the signal book overboard,” he remarked, and the
group of hunters grinned.

I debated a moment, looking him squarely in the eyes.  I had seen the
frightful treatment of the cabin-boy, and knew that I should very
probably receive the same, if not worse.  As I say, I debated with
myself, and then I did what I consider the bravest act of my life.  I ran
to the side, waving my arms and shouting:

“_Lady Mine_ ahoy!  Take me ashore!  A thousand dollars if you take me
ashore!”

I waited, watching two men who stood by the wheel, one of them steering.
The other was lifting a megaphone to his lips.  I did not turn my head,
though I expected every moment a killing blow from the human brute behind
me.  At last, after what seemed centuries, unable longer to stand the
strain, I looked around.  He had not moved.  He was standing in the same
position, swaying easily to the roll of the ship and lighting a fresh
cigar.

“What is the matter?  Anything wrong?”

This was the cry from the _Lady Mine_.

“Yes!” I shouted, at the top of my lungs.  “Life or death!  One thousand
dollars if you take me ashore!”

“Too much ’Frisco tanglefoot for the health of my crew!” Wolf Larsen
shouted after.  “This one”—indicating me with his thumb—“fancies
sea-serpents and monkeys just now!”

The man on the _Lady Mine_ laughed back through the megaphone.  The
pilot-boat plunged past.

“Give him hell for me!” came a final cry, and the two men waved their
arms in farewell.

I leaned despairingly over the rail, watching the trim little schooner
swiftly increasing the bleak sweep of ocean between us.  And she would
probably be in San Francisco in five or six hours!  My head seemed
bursting.  There was an ache in my throat as though my heart were up in
it.  A curling wave struck the side and splashed salt spray on my lips.
The wind puffed strongly, and the _Ghost_ heeled far over, burying her
lee rail.  I could hear the water rushing down upon the deck.

When I turned around, a moment later, I saw the cabin-boy staggering to
his feet.  His face was ghastly white, twitching with suppressed pain.
He looked very sick.

“Well, Leach, are you going for’ard?” Wolf Larsen asked.

“Yes, sir,” came the answer of a spirit cowed.

“And you?” I was asked.

“I’ll give you a thousand—” I began, but was interrupted.

“Stow that!  Are you going to take up your duties as cabin-boy?  Or do I
have to take you in hand?”

What was I to do?  To be brutally beaten, to be killed perhaps, would not
help my case.  I looked steadily into the cruel grey eyes.  They might
have been granite for all the light and warmth of a human soul they
contained.  One may see the soul stir in some men’s eyes, but his were
bleak, and cold, and grey as the sea itself.

“Well?”

“Yes,” I said.

“Say ‘yes, sir.’”

“Yes, sir,” I corrected.

“What is your name?”

“Van Weyden, sir.”

“First name?”

“Humphrey, sir; Humphrey Van Weyden.”

“Age?”

“Thirty-five, sir.”

“That’ll do.  Go to the cook and learn your duties.”

And thus it was that I passed into a state of involuntary servitude to
Wolf Larsen.  He was stronger than I, that was all.  But it was very
unreal at the time.  It is no less unreal now that I look back upon it.
It will always be to me a monstrous, inconceivable thing, a horrible
nightmare.

“Hold on, don’t go yet.”

I stopped obediently in my walk toward the galley.

“Johansen, call all hands.  Now that we’ve everything cleaned up, we’ll
have the funeral and get the decks cleared of useless lumber.”

While Johansen was summoning the watch below, a couple of sailors, under
the captain’s direction, laid the canvas-swathed corpse upon a
hatch-cover.  On either side the deck, against the rail and bottoms up,
were lashed a number of small boats.  Several men picked up the
hatch-cover with its ghastly freight, carried it to the lee side, and
rested it on the boats, the feet pointing overboard.  To the feet was
attached the sack of coal which the cook had fetched.

I had always conceived a burial at sea to be a very solemn and
awe-inspiring event, but I was quickly disillusioned, by this burial at
any rate.  One of the hunters, a little dark-eyed man whom his mates
called “Smoke,” was telling stories, liberally intersprinkled with oaths
and obscenities; and every minute or so the group of hunters gave mouth
to a laughter that sounded to me like a wolf-chorus or the barking of
hell-hounds.  The sailors trooped noisily aft, some of the watch below
rubbing the sleep from their eyes, and talked in low tones together.
There was an ominous and worried expression on their faces.  It was
evident that they did not like the outlook of a voyage under such a
captain and begun so inauspiciously.  From time to time they stole
glances at Wolf Larsen, and I could see that they were apprehensive of
the man.

He stepped up to the hatch-cover, and all caps came off.  I ran my eyes
over them—twenty men all told; twenty-two including the man at the wheel
and myself.  I was pardonably curious in my survey, for it appeared my
fate to be pent up with them on this miniature floating world for I knew
not how many weeks or months.  The sailors, in the main, were English and
Scandinavian, and their faces seemed of the heavy, stolid order.  The
hunters, on the other hand, had stronger and more diversified faces, with
hard lines and the marks of the free play of passions.  Strange to say,
and I noted it at once, Wolf Larsen’s features showed no such evil
stamp.  There seemed nothing vicious in them.  True, there were lines,
but they were the lines of decision and firmness.  It seemed, rather, a
frank and open countenance, which frankness or openness was enhanced by
the fact that he was smooth-shaven.  I could hardly believe—until the
next incident occurred—that it was the face of a man who could behave as
he had behaved to the cabin-boy.

At this moment, as he opened his mouth to speak, puff after puff struck
the schooner and pressed her side under.  The wind shrieked a wild song
through the rigging.  Some of the hunters glanced anxiously aloft.  The
lee rail, where the dead man lay, was buried in the sea, and as the
schooner lifted and righted the water swept across the deck wetting us
above our shoe-tops.  A shower of rain drove down upon us, each drop
stinging like a hailstone.  As it passed, Wolf Larsen began to speak, the
bare-headed men swaying in unison, to the heave and lunge of the deck.

“I only remember one part of the service,” he said, “and that is, ‘And
the body shall be cast into the sea.’  So cast it in.”

He ceased speaking.  The men holding the hatch-cover seemed perplexed,
puzzled no doubt by the briefness of the ceremony.  He burst upon them in
a fury.

“Lift up that end there, damn you!  What the hell’s the matter with you?”

They elevated the end of the hatch-cover with pitiful haste, and, like a
dog flung overside, the dead man slid feet first into the sea.  The coal
at his feet dragged him down.  He was gone.

“Johansen,” Wolf Larsen said briskly to the new mate, “keep all hands on
deck now they’re here.  Get in the topsails and jibs and make a good job
of it.  We’re in for a sou’-easter.  Better reef the jib and mainsail
too, while you’re about it.”

In a moment the decks were in commotion, Johansen bellowing orders and
the men pulling or letting go ropes of various sorts—all naturally
confusing to a landsman such as myself.  But it was the heartlessness of
it that especially struck me.  The dead man was an episode that was past,
an incident that was dropped, in a canvas covering with a sack of coal,
while the ship sped along and her work went on.  Nobody had been
affected.  The hunters were laughing at a fresh story of Smoke’s; the men
pulling and hauling, and two of them climbing aloft; Wolf Larsen was
studying the clouding sky to windward; and the dead man, dying obscenely,
buried sordidly, and sinking down, down—

Then it was that the cruelty of the sea, its relentlessness and
awfulness, rushed upon me.  Life had become cheap and tawdry, a beastly
and inarticulate thing, a soulless stirring of the ooze and slime.  I
held on to the weather rail, close by the shrouds, and gazed out across
the desolate foaming waves to the low-lying fog-banks that hid San
Francisco and the California coast.  Rain-squalls were driving in
between, and I could scarcely see the fog.  And this strange vessel, with
its terrible men, pressed under by wind and sea and ever leaping up and
out, was heading away into the south-west, into the great and lonely
Pacific expanse.




CHAPTER IV


What happened to me next on the sealing-schooner _Ghost_, as I strove to
fit into my new environment, are matters of humiliation and pain.  The
cook, who was called “the doctor” by the crew, “Tommy” by the hunters,
and “Cooky” by Wolf Larsen, was a changed person.  The difference worked
in my status brought about a corresponding difference in treatment from
him.  Servile and fawning as he had been before, he was now as
domineering and bellicose.  In truth, I was no longer the fine gentleman
with a skin soft as a “lydy’s,” but only an ordinary and very worthless
cabin-boy.

He absurdly insisted upon my addressing him as Mr. Mugridge, and his
behaviour and carriage were insufferable as he showed me my duties.
Besides my work in the cabin, with its four small state-rooms, I was
supposed to be his assistant in the galley, and my colossal ignorance
concerning such things as peeling potatoes or washing greasy pots was a
source of unending and sarcastic wonder to him.  He refused to take into
consideration what I was, or, rather, what my life and the things I was
accustomed to had been.  This was part of the attitude he chose to adopt
toward me; and I confess, ere the day was done, that I hated him with
more lively feelings than I had ever hated any one in my life before.

This first day was made more difficult for me from the fact that the
_Ghost_, under close reefs (terms such as these I did not learn till
later), was plunging through what Mr. Mugridge called an “’owlin’
sou’-easter.”  At half-past five, under his directions, I set the table
in the cabin, with rough-weather trays in place, and then carried the tea
and cooked food down from the galley.  In this connection I cannot
forbear relating my first experience with a boarding sea.

“Look sharp or you’ll get doused,” was Mr. Mugridge’s parting injunction,
as I left the galley with a big tea-pot in one hand, and in the hollow of
the other arm several loaves of fresh-baked bread.  One of the hunters, a
tall, loose-jointed chap named Henderson, was going aft at the time from
the steerage (the name the hunters facetiously gave their midships
sleeping quarters) to the cabin.  Wolf Larsen was on the poop, smoking
his everlasting cigar.

“’Ere she comes.  Sling yer ’ook!” the cook cried.

I stopped, for I did not know what was coming, and saw the galley door
slide shut with a bang.  Then I saw Henderson leaping like a madman for
the main rigging, up which he shot, on the inside, till he was many feet
higher than my head.  Also I saw a great wave, curling and foaming,
poised far above the rail.  I was directly under it.  My mind did not
work quickly, everything was so new and strange.  I grasped that I was in
danger, but that was all.  I stood still, in trepidation.  Then Wolf
Larsen shouted from the poop:

“Grab hold something, you—you Hump!”

But it was too late.  I sprang toward the rigging, to which I might have
clung, and was met by the descending wall of water.  What happened after
that was very confusing.  I was beneath the water, suffocating and
drowning.  My feet were out from under me, and I was turning over and
over and being swept along I knew not where.  Several times I collided
against hard objects, once striking my right knee a terrible blow.  Then
the flood seemed suddenly to subside and I was breathing the good air
again.  I had been swept against the galley and around the steerage
companion-way from the weather side into the lee scuppers.  The pain from
my hurt knee was agonizing.  I could not put my weight on it, or, at
least, I thought I could not put my weight on it; and I felt sure the leg
was broken.  But the cook was after me, shouting through the lee galley
door:

“’Ere, you!  Don’t tyke all night about it!  Where’s the pot?  Lost
overboard?  Serve you bloody well right if yer neck was broke!”

I managed to struggle to my feet.  The great tea-pot was still in my
hand.  I limped to the galley and handed it to him.  But he was consumed
with indignation, real or feigned.

“Gawd blime me if you ayn’t a slob.  Wot ’re you good for anyw’y, I’d
like to know?  Eh?  Wot ’re you good for any’wy?  Cawn’t even carry a bit
of tea aft without losin’ it.  Now I’ll ’ave to boil some more.

“An’ wot ’re you snifflin’ about?” he burst out at me, with renewed rage.
“’Cos you’ve ’urt yer pore little leg, pore little mamma’s darlin’.”

I was not sniffling, though my face might well have been drawn and
twitching from the pain.  But I called up all my resolution, set my
teeth, and hobbled back and forth from galley to cabin and cabin to
galley without further mishap.  Two things I had acquired by my accident:
an injured knee-cap that went undressed and from which I suffered for
weary months, and the name of “Hump,” which Wolf Larsen had called me
from the poop.  Thereafter, fore and aft, I was known by no other name,
until the term became a part of my thought-processes and I identified it
with myself, thought of myself as Hump, as though Hump were I and had
always been I.

It was no easy task, waiting on the cabin table, where sat Wolf Larsen,
Johansen, and the six hunters.  The cabin was small, to begin with, and
to move around, as I was compelled to, was not made easier by the
schooner’s violent pitching and wallowing.  But what struck me most
forcibly was the total lack of sympathy on the part of the men whom I
served.  I could feel my knee through my clothes, swelling, and swelling,
and I was sick and faint from the pain of it.  I could catch glimpses of
my face, white and ghastly, distorted with pain, in the cabin mirror.
All the men must have seen my condition, but not one spoke or took notice
of me, till I was almost grateful to Wolf Larsen, later on (I was washing
the dishes), when he said:

“Don’t let a little thing like that bother you.  You’ll get used to such
things in time.  It may cripple you some, but all the same you’ll be
learning to walk.

“That’s what you call a paradox, isn’t it?” he added.

He seemed pleased when I nodded my head with the customary “Yes, sir.”

“I suppose you know a bit about literary things?  Eh?  Good.  I’ll have
some talks with you some time.”

And then, taking no further account of me, he turned his back and went up
on deck.

That night, when I had finished an endless amount of work, I was sent to
sleep in the steerage, where I made up a spare bunk.  I was glad to get
out of the detestable presence of the cook and to be off my feet.  To my
surprise, my clothes had dried on me and there seemed no indications of
catching cold, either from the last soaking or from the prolonged soaking
from the foundering of the _Martinez_.  Under ordinary circumstances,
after all that I had undergone, I should have been fit for bed and a
trained nurse.

But my knee was bothering me terribly.  As well as I could make out, the
kneecap seemed turned up on edge in the midst of the swelling.  As I sat
in my bunk examining it (the six hunters were all in the steerage,
smoking and talking in loud voices), Henderson took a passing glance at
it.

“Looks nasty,” he commented.  “Tie a rag around it, and it’ll be all
right.”

That was all; and on the land I would have been lying on the broad of my
back, with a surgeon attending on me, and with strict injunctions to do
nothing but rest.  But I must do these men justice.  Callous as they were
to my suffering, they were equally callous to their own when anything
befell them.  And this was due, I believe, first, to habit; and second,
to the fact that they were less sensitively organized.  I really believe
that a finely-organized, high-strung man would suffer twice and thrice as
much as they from a like injury.

Tired as I was,—exhausted, in fact,—I was prevented from sleeping by the
pain in my knee.  It was all I could do to keep from groaning aloud.  At
home I should undoubtedly have given vent to my anguish; but this new and
elemental environment seemed to call for a savage repression.  Like the
savage, the attitude of these men was stoical in great things, childish
in little things.  I remember, later in the voyage, seeing Kerfoot,
another of the hunters, lose a finger by having it smashed to a jelly;
and he did not even murmur or change the expression on his face.  Yet I
have seen the same man, time and again, fly into the most outrageous
passion over a trifle.

He was doing it now, vociferating, bellowing, waving his arms, and
cursing like a fiend, and all because of a disagreement with another
hunter as to whether a seal pup knew instinctively how to swim.  He held
that it did, that it could swim the moment it was born.  The other
hunter, Latimer, a lean, Yankee-looking fellow with shrewd,
narrow-slitted eyes, held otherwise, held that the seal pup was born on
the land for no other reason than that it could not swim, that its mother
was compelled to teach it to swim as birds were compelled to teach their
nestlings how to fly.

For the most part, the remaining four hunters leaned on the table or lay
in their bunks and left the discussion to the two antagonists.  But they
were supremely interested, for every little while they ardently took
sides, and sometimes all were talking at once, till their voices surged
back and forth in waves of sound like mimic thunder-rolls in the confined
space.  Childish and immaterial as the topic was, the quality of their
reasoning was still more childish and immaterial.  In truth, there was
very little reasoning or none at all.  Their method was one of assertion,
assumption, and denunciation.  They proved that a seal pup could swim or
not swim at birth by stating the proposition very bellicosely and then
following it up with an attack on the opposing man’s judgment, common
sense, nationality, or past history.  Rebuttal was precisely similar.  I
have related this in order to show the mental calibre of the men with
whom I was thrown in contact.  Intellectually they were children,
inhabiting the physical forms of men.

And they smoked, incessantly smoked, using a coarse, cheap, and
offensive-smelling tobacco.  The air was thick and murky with the smoke
of it; and this, combined with the violent movement of the ship as she
struggled through the storm, would surely have made me sea-sick had I
been a victim to that malady.  As it was, it made me quite squeamish,
though this nausea might have been due to the pain of my leg and
exhaustion.

As I lay there thinking, I naturally dwelt upon myself and my situation.
It was unparalleled, undreamed-of, that I, Humphrey Van Weyden, a scholar
and a dilettante, if you please, in things artistic and literary, should
be lying here on a Bering Sea seal-hunting schooner.  Cabin-boy!  I had
never done any hard manual labour, or scullion labour, in my life.  I had
lived a placid, uneventful, sedentary existence all my days—the life of a
scholar and a recluse on an assured and comfortable income.  Violent life
and athletic sports had never appealed to me.  I had always been a
book-worm; so my sisters and father had called me during my childhood.  I
had gone camping but once in my life, and then I left the party almost at
its start and returned to the comforts and conveniences of a roof.  And
here I was, with dreary and endless vistas before me of table-setting,
potato-peeling, and dish-washing.  And I was not strong.  The doctors had
always said that I had a remarkable constitution, but I had never
developed it or my body through exercise.  My muscles were small and
soft, like a woman’s, or so the doctors had said time and again in the
course of their attempts to persuade me to go in for physical-culture
fads.  But I had preferred to use my head rather than my body; and here I
was, in no fit condition for the rough life in prospect.

These are merely a few of the things that went through my mind, and are
related for the sake of vindicating myself in advance in the weak and
helpless _rôle_ I was destined to play.  But I thought, also, of my
mother and sisters, and pictured their grief.  I was among the missing
dead of the _Martinez_ disaster, an unrecovered body.  I could see the
head-lines in the papers; the fellows at the University Club and the
Bibelot shaking their heads and saying, “Poor chap!”  And I could see
Charley Furuseth, as I had said good-bye to him that morning, lounging in
a dressing-gown on the be-pillowed window couch and delivering himself of
oracular and pessimistic epigrams.

And all the while, rolling, plunging, climbing the moving mountains and
falling and wallowing in the foaming valleys, the schooner _Ghost_ was
fighting her way farther and farther into the heart of the Pacific—and I
was on her.  I could hear the wind above.  It came to my ears as a
muffled roar.  Now and again feet stamped overhead.  An endless creaking
was going on all about me, the woodwork and the fittings groaning and
squeaking and complaining in a thousand keys.  The hunters were still
arguing and roaring like some semi-human amphibious breed.  The air was
filled with oaths and indecent expressions.  I could see their faces,
flushed and angry, the brutality distorted and emphasized by the sickly
yellow of the sea-lamps which rocked back and forth with the ship.
Through the dim smoke-haze the bunks looked like the sleeping dens of
animals in a menagerie.  Oilskins and sea-boots were hanging from the
walls, and here and there rifles and shotguns rested securely in the
racks.  It was a sea-fitting for the buccaneers and pirates of by-gone
years.  My imagination ran riot, and still I could not sleep.  And it was
a long, long night, weary and dreary and long.




CHAPTER V


But my first night in the hunters’ steerage was also my last.  Next day
Johansen, the new mate, was routed from the cabin by Wolf Larsen, and
sent into the steerage to sleep thereafter, while I took possession of
the tiny cabin state-room, which, on the first day of the voyage, had
already had two occupants.  The reason for this change was quickly
learned by the hunters, and became the cause of a deal of grumbling on
their part.  It seemed that Johansen, in his sleep, lived over each night
the events of the day.  His incessant talking and shouting and bellowing
of orders had been too much for Wolf Larsen, who had accordingly foisted
the nuisance upon his hunters.

After a sleepless night, I arose weak and in agony, to hobble through my
second day on the _Ghost_.  Thomas Mugridge routed me out at half-past
five, much in the fashion that Bill Sykes must have routed out his dog;
but Mr. Mugridge’s brutality to me was paid back in kind and with
interest.  The unnecessary noise he made (I had lain wide-eyed the whole
night) must have awakened one of the hunters; for a heavy shoe whizzed
through the semi-darkness, and Mr. Mugridge, with a sharp howl of pain,
humbly begged everybody’s pardon.  Later on, in the galley, I noticed
that his ear was bruised and swollen.  It never went entirely back to its
normal shape, and was called a “cauliflower ear” by the sailors.

The day was filled with miserable variety.  I had taken my dried clothes
down from the galley the night before, and the first thing I did was to
exchange the cook’s garments for them.  I looked for my purse.  In
addition to some small change (and I have a good memory for such things),
it had contained one hundred and eighty-five dollars in gold and paper.
The purse I found, but its contents, with the exception of the small
silver, had been abstracted.  I spoke to the cook about it, when I went
on deck to take up my duties in the galley, and though I had looked
forward to a surly answer, I had not expected the belligerent harangue
that I received.

“Look ’ere, ’Ump,” he began, a malicious light in his eyes and a snarl in
his throat; “d’ye want yer nose punched?  If you think I’m a thief, just
keep it to yerself, or you’ll find ’ow bloody well mistyken you are.
Strike me blind if this ayn’t gratitude for yer!  ’Ere you come, a pore
mis’rable specimen of ’uman scum, an’ I tykes yer into my galley an’
treats yer ’ansom, an’ this is wot I get for it.  Nex’ time you can go to
’ell, say I, an’ I’ve a good mind to give you what-for anyw’y.”

So saying, he put up his fists and started for me.  To my shame be it, I
cowered away from the blow and ran out the galley door.  What else was I
to do?  Force, nothing but force, obtained on this brute-ship.  Moral
suasion was a thing unknown.  Picture it to yourself: a man of ordinary
stature, slender of build, and with weak, undeveloped muscles, who has
lived a peaceful, placid life, and is unused to violence of any sort—what
could such a man possibly do?  There was no more reason that I should
stand and face these human beasts than that I should stand and face an
infuriated bull.

So I thought it out at the time, feeling the need for vindication and
desiring to be at peace with my conscience.  But this vindication did not
satisfy.  Nor, to this day can I permit my manhood to look back upon
those events and feel entirely exonerated.  The situation was something
that really exceeded rational formulas for conduct and demanded more than
the cold conclusions of reason.  When viewed in the light of formal
logic, there is not one thing of which to be ashamed; but nevertheless a
shame rises within me at the recollection, and in the pride of my manhood
I feel that my manhood has in unaccountable ways been smirched and
sullied.

All of which is neither here nor there.  The speed with which I ran from
the galley caused excruciating pain in my knee, and I sank down
helplessly at the break of the poop.  But the Cockney had not pursued me.

“Look at ’im run!  Look at ’im run!” I could hear him crying.  “An’ with
a gyme leg at that!  Come on back, you pore little mamma’s darling.  I
won’t ’it yer; no, I won’t.”

I came back and went on with my work; and here the episode ended for the
time, though further developments were yet to take place.  I set the
breakfast-table in the cabin, and at seven o’clock waited on the hunters
and officers.  The storm had evidently broken during the night, though a
huge sea was still running and a stiff wind blowing.  Sail had been made
in the early watches, so that the _Ghost_ was racing along under
everything except the two topsails and the flying jib.  These three
sails, I gathered from the conversation, were to be set immediately after
breakfast.  I learned, also, that Wolf Larsen was anxious to make the
most of the storm, which was driving him to the south-west into that
portion of the sea where he expected to pick up with the north-east
trades.  It was before this steady wind that he hoped to make the major
portion of the run to Japan, curving south into the tropics and north
again as he approached the coast of Asia.

After breakfast I had another unenviable experience.  When I had finished
washing the dishes, I cleaned the cabin stove and carried the ashes up on
deck to empty them.  Wolf Larsen and Henderson were standing near the
wheel, deep in conversation.  The sailor, Johnson, was steering.  As I
started toward the weather side I saw him make a sudden motion with his
head, which I mistook for a token of recognition and good-morning.  In
reality, he was attempting to warn me to throw my ashes over the lee
side.  Unconscious of my blunder, I passed by Wolf Larsen and the hunter
and flung the ashes over the side to windward.  The wind drove them back,
and not only over me, but over Henderson and Wolf Larsen.  The next
instant the latter kicked me, violently, as a cur is kicked.  I had not
realized there could be so much pain in a kick.  I reeled away from him
and leaned against the cabin in a half-fainting condition.  Everything
was swimming before my eyes, and I turned sick.  The nausea overpowered
me, and I managed to crawl to the side of the vessel.  But Wolf Larsen
did not follow me up.  Brushing the ashes from his clothes, he had
resumed his conversation with Henderson.  Johansen, who had seen the
affair from the break of the poop, sent a couple of sailors aft to clean
up the mess.

Later in the morning I received a surprise of a totally different sort.
Following the cook’s instructions, I had gone into Wolf Larsen’s
state-room to put it to rights and make the bed.  Against the wall, near
the head of the bunk, was a rack filled with books.  I glanced over them,
noting with astonishment such names as Shakespeare, Tennyson, Poe, and De
Quincey.  There were scientific works, too, among which were represented
men such as Tyndall, Proctor, and Darwin.  Astronomy and physics were
represented, and I remarked Bulfinch’s _Age of Fable_, Shaw’s _History of
English and American Literature_, and Johnson’s _Natural History_ in two
large volumes.  Then there were a number of grammars, such as Metcalf’s,
and Reed and Kellogg’s; and I smiled as I saw a copy of _The Dean’s
English_.

I could not reconcile these books with the man from what I had seen of
him, and I wondered if he could possibly read them.  But when I came to
make the bed I found, between the blankets, dropped apparently as he had
sunk off to sleep, a complete Browning, the Cambridge Edition.  It was
open at “In a Balcony,” and I noticed, here and there, passages
underlined in pencil.  Further, letting drop the volume during a lurch of
the ship, a sheet of paper fell out.  It was scrawled over with
geometrical diagrams and calculations of some sort.

It was patent that this terrible man was no ignorant clod, such as one
would inevitably suppose him to be from his exhibitions of brutality.  At
once he became an enigma.  One side or the other of his nature was
perfectly comprehensible; but both sides together were bewildering.  I
had already remarked that his language was excellent, marred with an
occasional slight inaccuracy.  Of course, in common speech with the
sailors and hunters, it sometimes fairly bristled with errors, which was
due to the vernacular itself; but in the few words he had held with me it
had been clear and correct.

This glimpse I had caught of his other side must have emboldened me, for
I resolved to speak to him about the money I had lost.

“I have been robbed,” I said to him, a little later, when I found him
pacing up and down the poop alone.

“Sir,” he corrected, not harshly, but sternly.

“I have been robbed, sir,” I amended.

“How did it happen?” he asked.

Then I told him the whole circumstance, how my clothes had been left to
dry in the galley, and how, later, I was nearly beaten by the cook when I
mentioned the matter.

He smiled at my recital.  “Pickings,” he concluded; “Cooky’s pickings.
And don’t you think your miserable life worth the price?  Besides,
consider it a lesson.  You’ll learn in time how to take care of your
money for yourself.  I suppose, up to now, your lawyer has done it for
you, or your business agent.”

I could feel the quiet sneer through his words, but demanded, “How can I
get it back again?”

“That’s your look-out.  You haven’t any lawyer or business agent now, so
you’ll have to depend on yourself.  When you get a dollar, hang on to it.
A man who leaves his money lying around, the way you did, deserves to
lose it.  Besides, you have sinned.  You have no right to put temptation
in the way of your fellow-creatures.  You tempted Cooky, and he fell.
You have placed his immortal soul in jeopardy.  By the way, do you
believe in the immortal soul?”

His lids lifted lazily as he asked the question, and it seemed that the
deeps were opening to me and that I was gazing into his soul.  But it was
an illusion.  Far as it might have seemed, no man has ever seen very far
into Wolf Larsen’s soul, or seen it at all,—of this I am convinced.  It
was a very lonely soul, I was to learn, that never unmasked, though at
rare moments it played at doing so.

“I read immortality in your eyes,” I answered, dropping the “sir,”—an
experiment, for I thought the intimacy of the conversation warranted it.

He took no notice.  “By that, I take it, you see something that is alive,
but that necessarily does not have to live for ever.”

“I read more than that,” I continued boldly.

“Then you read consciousness.  You read the consciousness of life that it
is alive; but still no further away, no endlessness of life.”

How clearly he thought, and how well he expressed what he thought!  From
regarding me curiously, he turned his head and glanced out over the
leaden sea to windward.  A bleakness came into his eyes, and the lines of
his mouth grew severe and harsh.  He was evidently in a pessimistic mood.

“Then to what end?” he demanded abruptly, turning back to me.  “If I am
immortal—why?”

I halted.  How could I explain my idealism to this man?  How could I put
into speech a something felt, a something like the strains of music heard
in sleep, a something that convinced yet transcended utterance?

“What do you believe, then?” I countered.

“I believe that life is a mess,” he answered promptly.  “It is like
yeast, a ferment, a thing that moves and may move for a minute, an hour,
a year, or a hundred years, but that in the end will cease to move.  The
big eat the little that they may continue to move, the strong eat the
weak that they may retain their strength.  The lucky eat the most and
move the longest, that is all.  What do you make of those things?”

He swept his arm in an impatient gesture toward a number of the sailors
who were working on some kind of rope stuff amidships.

“They move, so does the jelly-fish move.  They move in order to eat in
order that they may keep moving.  There you have it.  They live for their
belly’s sake, and the belly is for their sake.  It’s a circle; you get
nowhere.  Neither do they.  In the end they come to a standstill.  They
move no more.  They are dead.”

“They have dreams,” I interrupted, “radiant, flashing dreams—”

“Of grub,” he concluded sententiously.

“And of more—”

“Grub.  Of a larger appetite and more luck in satisfying it.”  His voice
sounded harsh.  There was no levity in it.  “For, look you, they dream of
making lucky voyages which will bring them more money, of becoming the
mates of ships, of finding fortunes—in short, of being in a better
position for preying on their fellows, of having all night in, good grub
and somebody else to do the dirty work.  You and I are just like them.
There is no difference, except that we have eaten more and better.  I am
eating them now, and you too.  But in the past you have eaten more than I
have.  You have slept in soft beds, and worn fine clothes, and eaten good
meals.  Who made those beds? and those clothes? and those meals?  Not
you.  You never made anything in your own sweat.  You live on an income
which your father earned.  You are like a frigate bird swooping down upon
the boobies and robbing them of the fish they have caught.  You are one
with a crowd of men who have made what they call a government, who are
masters of all the other men, and who eat the food the other men get and
would like to eat themselves.  You wear the warm clothes.  They made the
clothes, but they shiver in rags and ask you, the lawyer, or business
agent who handles your money, for a job.”

“But that is beside the matter,” I cried.

“Not at all.”  He was speaking rapidly now, and his eyes were flashing.
“It is piggishness, and it is life.  Of what use or sense is an
immortality of piggishness?  What is the end?  What is it all about?  You
have made no food.  Yet the food you have eaten or wasted might have
saved the lives of a score of wretches who made the food but did not eat
it.  What immortal end did you serve? or did they?  Consider yourself and
me.  What does your boasted immortality amount to when your life runs
foul of mine?  You would like to go back to the land, which is a
favourable place for your kind of piggishness.  It is a whim of mine to
keep you aboard this ship, where my piggishness flourishes.  And keep you
I will.  I may make or break you.  You may die to-day, this week, or next
month.  I could kill you now, with a blow of my fist, for you are a
miserable weakling.  But if we are immortal, what is the reason for this?
To be piggish as you and I have been all our lives does not seem to be
just the thing for immortals to be doing.  Again, what’s it all about?
Why have I kept you here?—”

“Because you are stronger,” I managed to blurt out.

“But why stronger?” he went on at once with his perpetual queries.
“Because I am a bigger bit of the ferment than you?  Don’t you see?
Don’t you see?”

“But the hopelessness of it,” I protested.

“I agree with you,” he answered.  “Then why move at all, since moving is
living?  Without moving and being part of the yeast there would be no
hopelessness.  But,—and there it is,—we want to live and move, though we
have no reason to, because it happens that it is the nature of life to
live and move, to want to live and move.  If it were not for this, life
would be dead.  It is because of this life that is in you that you dream
of your immortality.  The life that is in you is alive and wants to go on
being alive for ever.  Bah!  An eternity of piggishness!”

He abruptly turned on his heel and started forward.  He stopped at the
break of the poop and called me to him.

“By the way, how much was it that Cooky got away with?” he asked.

“One hundred and eighty-five dollars, sir,” I answered.

He nodded his head.  A moment later, as I started down the companion
stairs to lay the table for dinner, I heard him loudly cursing some men
amidships.




CHAPTER VI


By the following morning the storm had blown itself quite out and the
_Ghost_ was rolling slightly on a calm sea without a breath of wind.
Occasional light airs were felt, however, and Wolf Larsen patrolled the
poop constantly, his eyes ever searching the sea to the north-eastward,
from which direction the great trade-wind must blow.

The men were all on deck and busy preparing their various boats for the
season’s hunting.  There are seven boats aboard, the captain’s dingey,
and the six which the hunters will use.  Three, a hunter, a boat-puller,
and a boat-steerer, compose a boat’s crew.  On board the schooner the
boat-pullers and steerers are the crew.  The hunters, too, are supposed
to be in command of the watches, subject, always, to the orders of Wolf
Larsen.

All this, and more, I have learned.  The _Ghost_ is considered the
fastest schooner in both the San Francisco and Victoria fleets.  In fact,
she was once a private yacht, and was built for speed.  Her lines and
fittings—though I know nothing about such things—speak for themselves.
Johnson was telling me about her in a short chat I had with him during
yesterday’s second dog-watch.  He spoke enthusiastically, with the love
for a fine craft such as some men feel for horses.  He is greatly
disgusted with the outlook, and I am given to understand that Wolf Larsen
bears a very unsavoury reputation among the sealing captains.  It was the
_Ghost_ herself that lured Johnson into signing for the voyage, but he is
already beginning to repent.

As he told me, the _Ghost_ is an eighty-ton schooner of a remarkably fine
model.  Her beam, or width, is twenty-three feet, and her length a little
over ninety feet.  A lead keel of fabulous but unknown weight makes her
very stable, while she carries an immense spread of canvas.  From the
deck to the truck of the maintopmast is something over a hundred feet,
while the foremast with its topmast is eight or ten feet shorter.  I am
giving these details so that the size of this little floating world which
holds twenty-two men may be appreciated.  It is a very little world, a
mote, a speck, and I marvel that men should dare to venture the sea on a
contrivance so small and fragile.

Wolf Larsen has, also, a reputation for reckless carrying on of sail.  I
overheard Henderson and another of the hunters, Standish, a Californian,
talking about it.  Two years ago he dismasted the _Ghost_ in a gale on
Bering Sea, whereupon the present masts were put in, which are stronger
and heavier in every way.  He is said to have remarked, when he put them
in, that he preferred turning her over to losing the sticks.

Every man aboard, with the exception of Johansen, who is rather overcome
by his promotion, seems to have an excuse for having sailed on the
_Ghost_.  Half the men forward are deep-water sailors, and their excuse
is that they did not know anything about her or her captain.  And those
who do know, whisper that the hunters, while excellent shots, were so
notorious for their quarrelsome and rascally proclivities that they could
not sign on any decent schooner.

I have made the acquaintance of another one of the crew,—Louis he is
called, a rotund and jovial-faced Nova Scotia Irishman, and a very
sociable fellow, prone to talk as long as he can find a listener.  In the
afternoon, while the cook was below asleep and I was peeling the
everlasting potatoes, Louis dropped into the galley for a “yarn.”  His
excuse for being aboard was that he was drunk when he signed.  He assured
me again and again that it was the last thing in the world he would dream
of doing in a sober moment.  It seems that he has been seal-hunting
regularly each season for a dozen years, and is accounted one of the two
or three very best boat-steerers in both fleets.

“Ah, my boy,” he shook his head ominously at me, “’tis the worst schooner
ye could iv selected, nor were ye drunk at the time as was I.  ’Tis
sealin’ is the sailor’s paradise—on other ships than this.  The mate was
the first, but mark me words, there’ll be more dead men before the trip
is done with.  Hist, now, between you an’ meself and the stanchion there,
this Wolf Larsen is a regular devil, an’ the _Ghost’ll_ be a hell-ship
like she’s always ben since he had hold iv her.  Don’t I know?  Don’t I
know?  Don’t I remember him in Hakodate two years gone, when he had a row
an’ shot four iv his men?  Wasn’t I a-layin’ on the _Emma L._, not three
hundred yards away?  An’ there was a man the same year he killed with a
blow iv his fist.  Yes, sir, killed ’im dead-oh.  His head must iv
smashed like an eggshell.  An’ wasn’t there the Governor of Kura Island,
an’ the Chief iv Police, Japanese gentlemen, sir, an’ didn’t they come
aboard the _Ghost_ as his guests, a-bringin’ their wives along—wee an’
pretty little bits of things like you see ’em painted on fans.  An’ as he
was a-gettin’ under way, didn’t the fond husbands get left astern-like in
their sampan, as it might be by accident?  An’ wasn’t it a week later
that the poor little ladies was put ashore on the other side of the
island, with nothin’ before ’em but to walk home acrost the mountains on
their weeny-teeny little straw sandals which wouldn’t hang together a
mile?  Don’t I know?  ’Tis the beast he is, this Wolf Larsen—the great
big beast mentioned iv in Revelation; an’ no good end will he ever come
to.  But I’ve said nothin’ to ye, mind ye.  I’ve whispered never a word;
for old fat Louis’ll live the voyage out if the last mother’s son of yez
go to the fishes.”

“Wolf Larsen!” he snorted a moment later.  “Listen to the word, will ye!
Wolf—’tis what he is.  He’s not black-hearted like some men.  ’Tis no
heart he has at all.  Wolf, just wolf, ’tis what he is.  D’ye wonder he’s
well named?”

“But if he is so well-known for what he is,” I queried, “how is it that
he can get men to ship with him?”

“An’ how is it ye can get men to do anything on God’s earth an’ sea?”
Louis demanded with Celtic fire.  “How d’ye find me aboard if ’twasn’t
that I was drunk as a pig when I put me name down?  There’s them that
can’t sail with better men, like the hunters, and them that don’t know,
like the poor devils of wind-jammers for’ard there.  But they’ll come to
it, they’ll come to it, an’ be sorry the day they was born.  I could weep
for the poor creatures, did I but forget poor old fat Louis and the
troubles before him.  But ’tis not a whisper I’ve dropped, mind ye, not a
whisper.”

“Them hunters is the wicked boys,” he broke forth again, for he suffered
from a constitutional plethora of speech.  “But wait till they get to
cutting up iv jinks and rowin’ ’round.  He’s the boy’ll fix ’em.  ’Tis
him that’ll put the fear of God in their rotten black hearts.  Look at
that hunter iv mine, Horner.  ‘Jock’ Horner they call him, so quiet-like
an’ easy-goin’, soft-spoken as a girl, till ye’d think butter wouldn’t
melt in the mouth iv him.  Didn’t he kill his boat-steerer last year?
’Twas called a sad accident, but I met the boat-puller in Yokohama an’
the straight iv it was given me.  An’ there’s Smoke, the black little
devil—didn’t the Roosians have him for three years in the salt mines of
Siberia, for poachin’ on Copper Island, which is a Roosian preserve?
Shackled he was, hand an’ foot, with his mate.  An’ didn’t they have
words or a ruction of some kind?—for ’twas the other fellow Smoke sent up
in the buckets to the top of the mine; an’ a piece at a time he went up,
a leg to-day, an’ to-morrow an arm, the next day the head, an’ so on.”

“But you can’t mean it!” I cried out, overcome with the horror of it.

“Mean what!” he demanded, quick as a flash.  “’Tis nothin’ I’ve said.
Deef I am, and dumb, as ye should be for the sake iv your mother; an’
never once have I opened me lips but to say fine things iv them an’ him,
God curse his soul, an’ may he rot in purgatory ten thousand years, and
then go down to the last an’ deepest hell iv all!”

Johnson, the man who had chafed me raw when I first came aboard, seemed
the least equivocal of the men forward or aft.  In fact, there was
nothing equivocal about him.  One was struck at once by his
straightforwardness and manliness, which, in turn, were tempered by a
modesty which might be mistaken for timidity.  But timid he was not.  He
seemed, rather, to have the courage of his convictions, the certainty of
his manhood.  It was this that made him protest, at the commencement of
our acquaintance, against being called Yonson.  And upon this, and him,
Louis passed judgment and prophecy.

“’Tis a fine chap, that squarehead Johnson we’ve for’ard with us,” he
said.  “The best sailorman in the fo’c’sle.  He’s my boat-puller.  But
it’s to trouble he’ll come with Wolf Larsen, as the sparks fly upward.
It’s meself that knows.  I can see it brewin’ an’ comin’ up like a storm
in the sky.  I’ve talked to him like a brother, but it’s little he sees
in takin’ in his lights or flyin’ false signals.  He grumbles out when
things don’t go to suit him, and there’ll be always some tell-tale
carryin’ word iv it aft to the Wolf.  The Wolf is strong, and it’s the
way of a wolf to hate strength, an’ strength it is he’ll see in
Johnson—no knucklin’ under, and a ‘Yes, sir, thank ye kindly, sir,’ for a
curse or a blow.  Oh, she’s a-comin’!  She’s a-comin’!  An’ God knows
where I’ll get another boat-puller!  What does the fool up an’ say, when
the old man calls him Yonson, but ‘Me name is Johnson, sir,’ an’ then
spells it out, letter for letter.  Ye should iv seen the old man’s face!
I thought he’d let drive at him on the spot.  He didn’t, but he will, an’
he’ll break that squarehead’s heart, or it’s little I know iv the ways iv
men on the ships iv the sea.”

Thomas Mugridge is becoming unendurable.  I am compelled to Mister him
and to Sir him with every speech.  One reason for this is that Wolf
Larsen seems to have taken a fancy to him.  It is an unprecedented thing,
I take it, for a captain to be chummy with the cook; but this is
certainly what Wolf Larsen is doing.  Two or three times he put his head
into the galley and chaffed Mugridge good-naturedly, and once, this
afternoon, he stood by the break of the poop and chatted with him for
fully fifteen minutes.  When it was over, and Mugridge was back in the
galley, he became greasily radiant, and went about his work, humming
coster songs in a nerve-racking and discordant falsetto.

“I always get along with the officers,” he remarked to me in a
confidential tone.  “I know the w’y, I do, to myke myself uppreci-yted.
There was my last skipper—w’y I thought nothin’ of droppin’ down in the
cabin for a little chat and a friendly glass.  ‘Mugridge,’ sez ’e to me,
‘Mugridge,’ sez ’e, ‘you’ve missed yer vokytion.’  ‘An’ ’ow’s that?’ sez
I.  ‘Yer should ’a been born a gentleman, an’ never ’ad to work for yer
livin’.’  God strike me dead, ’Ump, if that ayn’t wot ’e sez, an’ me
a-sittin’ there in ’is own cabin, jolly-like an’ comfortable, a-smokin’
’is cigars an’ drinkin’ ’is rum.”

This chitter-chatter drove me to distraction.  I never heard a voice I
hated so.  His oily, insinuating tones, his greasy smile and his
monstrous self-conceit grated on my nerves till sometimes I was all in a
tremble.  Positively, he was the most disgusting and loathsome person I
have ever met.  The filth of his cooking was indescribable; and, as he
cooked everything that was eaten aboard, I was compelled to select what I
ate with great circumspection, choosing from the least dirty of his
concoctions.

My hands bothered me a great deal, unused as they were to work.  The
nails were discoloured and black, while the skin was already grained with
dirt which even a scrubbing-brush could not remove.  Then blisters came,
in a painful and never-ending procession, and I had a great burn on my
forearm, acquired by losing my balance in a roll of the ship and pitching
against the galley stove.  Nor was my knee any better.  The swelling had
not gone down, and the cap was still up on edge.  Hobbling about on it
from morning till night was not helping it any.  What I needed was rest,
if it were ever to get well.

Rest!  I never before knew the meaning of the word.  I had been resting
all my life and did not know it.  But now, could I sit still for one
half-hour and do nothing, not even think, it would be the most
pleasurable thing in the world.  But it is a revelation, on the other
hand.  I shall be able to appreciate the lives of the working people
hereafter.  I did not dream that work was so terrible a thing.  From
half-past five in the morning till ten o’clock at night I am everybody’s
slave, with not one moment to myself, except such as I can steal near the
end of the second dog-watch.  Let me pause for a minute to look out over
the sea sparkling in the sun, or to gaze at a sailor going aloft to the
gaff-topsails, or running out the bowsprit, and I am sure to hear the
hateful voice, “’Ere, you, ’Ump, no sodgerin’.  I’ve got my peepers on
yer.”

There are signs of rampant bad temper in the steerage, and the gossip is
going around that Smoke and Henderson have had a fight.  Henderson seems
the best of the hunters, a slow-going fellow, and hard to rouse; but
roused he must have been, for Smoke had a bruised and discoloured eye,
and looked particularly vicious when he came into the cabin for supper.

A cruel thing happened just before supper, indicative of the callousness
and brutishness of these men.  There is one green hand in the crew,
Harrison by name, a clumsy-looking country boy, mastered, I imagine, by
the spirit of adventure, and making his first voyage.  In the light
baffling airs the schooner had been tacking about a great deal, at which
times the sails pass from one side to the other and a man is sent aloft
to shift over the fore-gaff-topsail.  In some way, when Harrison was
aloft, the sheet jammed in the block through which it runs at the end of
the gaff.  As I understood it, there were two ways of getting it
cleared,—first, by lowering the foresail, which was comparatively easy
and without danger; and second, by climbing out the peak-halyards to the
end of the gaff itself, an exceedingly hazardous performance.

Johansen called out to Harrison to go out the halyards.  It was patent to
everybody that the boy was afraid.  And well he might be, eighty feet
above the deck, to trust himself on those thin and jerking ropes.  Had
there been a steady breeze it would not have been so bad, but the _Ghost_
was rolling emptily in a long sea, and with each roll the canvas flapped
and boomed and the halyards slacked and jerked taut.  They were capable
of snapping a man off like a fly from a whip-lash.

Harrison heard the order and understood what was demanded of him, but
hesitated.  It was probably the first time he had been aloft in his life.
Johansen, who had caught the contagion of Wolf Larsen’s masterfulness,
burst out with a volley of abuse and curses.

“That’ll do, Johansen,” Wolf Larsen said brusquely.  “I’ll have you know
that I do the swearing on this ship.  If I need your assistance, I’ll
call you in.”

“Yes, sir,” the mate acknowledged submissively.

In the meantime Harrison had started out on the halyards.  I was looking
up from the galley door, and I could see him trembling, as if with ague,
in every limb.  He proceeded very slowly and cautiously, an inch at a
time.  Outlined against the clear blue of the sky, he had the appearance
of an enormous spider crawling along the tracery of its web.

It was a slight uphill climb, for the foresail peaked high; and the
halyards, running through various blocks on the gaff and mast, gave him
separate holds for hands and feet.  But the trouble lay in that the wind
was not strong enough nor steady enough to keep the sail full.  When he
was half-way out, the _Ghost_ took a long roll to windward and back again
into the hollow between two seas.  Harrison ceased his progress and held
on tightly.  Eighty feet beneath, I could see the agonized strain of his
muscles as he gripped for very life.  The sail emptied and the gaff swung
amid-ships.  The halyards slackened, and, though it all happened very
quickly, I could see them sag beneath the weight of his body.  Then the
gaff swung to the side with an abrupt swiftness, the great sail boomed
like a cannon, and the three rows of reef-points slatted against the
canvas like a volley of rifles.  Harrison, clinging on, made the giddy
rush through the air.  This rush ceased abruptly.  The halyards became
instantly taut.  It was the snap of the whip.  His clutch was broken.
One hand was torn loose from its hold.  The other lingered desperately
for a moment, and followed.  His body pitched out and down, but in some
way he managed to save himself with his legs.  He was hanging by them,
head downward.  A quick effort brought his hands up to the halyards
again; but he was a long time regaining his former position, where he
hung, a pitiable object.

“I’ll bet he has no appetite for supper,” I heard Wolf Larsen’s voice,
which came to me from around the corner of the galley.  “Stand from
under, you, Johansen!  Watch out!  Here she comes!”

In truth, Harrison was very sick, as a person is sea-sick; and for a long
time he clung to his precarious perch without attempting to move.
Johansen, however, continued violently to urge him on to the completion
of his task.

“It is a shame,” I heard Johnson growling in painfully slow and correct
English.  He was standing by the main rigging, a few feet away from me.
“The boy is willing enough.  He will learn if he has a chance.  But this
is—”  He paused awhile, for the word “murder” was his final judgment.

“Hist, will ye!” Louis whispered to him, “For the love iv your mother
hold your mouth!”

But Johnson, looking on, still continued his grumbling.

“Look here,” the hunter Standish spoke to Wolf Larsen, “that’s my
boat-puller, and I don’t want to lose him.”

“That’s all right, Standish,” was the reply.  “He’s your boat-puller when
you’ve got him in the boat; but he’s my sailor when I have him aboard,
and I’ll do what I damn well please with him.”

“But that’s no reason—” Standish began in a torrent of speech.

“That’ll do, easy as she goes,” Wolf Larsen counselled back.  “I’ve told
you what’s what, and let it stop at that.  The man’s mine, and I’ll make
soup of him and eat it if I want to.”

There was an angry gleam in the hunter’s eye, but he turned on his heel
and entered the steerage companion-way, where he remained, looking
upward.  All hands were on deck now, and all eyes were aloft, where a
human life was at grapples with death.  The callousness of these men, to
whom industrial organization gave control of the lives of other men, was
appalling.  I, who had lived out of the whirl of the world, had never
dreamed that its work was carried on in such fashion.  Life had always
seemed a peculiarly sacred thing, but here it counted for nothing, was a
cipher in the arithmetic of commerce.  I must say, however, that the
sailors themselves were sympathetic, as instance the case of Johnson; but
the masters (the hunters and the captain) were heartlessly indifferent.
Even the protest of Standish arose out of the fact that he did not wish
to lose his boat-puller.  Had it been some other hunter’s boat-puller,
he, like them, would have been no more than amused.

But to return to Harrison.  It took Johansen, insulting and reviling the
poor wretch, fully ten minutes to get him started again.  A little later
he made the end of the gaff, where, astride the spar itself, he had a
better chance for holding on.  He cleared the sheet, and was free to
return, slightly downhill now, along the halyards to the mast.  But he
had lost his nerve.  Unsafe as was his present position, he was loath to
forsake it for the more unsafe position on the halyards.

He looked along the airy path he must traverse, and then down to the
deck.  His eyes were wide and staring, and he was trembling violently.  I
had never seen fear so strongly stamped upon a human face.  Johansen
called vainly for him to come down.  At any moment he was liable to be
snapped off the gaff, but he was helpless with fright.  Wolf Larsen,
walking up and down with Smoke and in conversation, took no more notice
of him, though he cried sharply, once, to the man at the wheel:

“You’re off your course, my man!  Be careful, unless you’re looking for
trouble!”

“Ay, ay, sir,” the helmsman responded, putting a couple of spokes down.

He had been guilty of running the _Ghost_ several points off her course
in order that what little wind there was should fill the foresail and
hold it steady.  He had striven to help the unfortunate Harrison at the
risk of incurring Wolf Larsen’s anger.

The time went by, and the suspense, to me, was terrible.  Thomas
Mugridge, on the other hand, considered it a laughable affair, and was
continually bobbing his head out the galley door to make jocose remarks.
How I hated him!  And how my hatred for him grew and grew, during that
fearful time, to cyclopean dimensions.  For the first time in my life I
experienced the desire to murder—“saw red,” as some of our picturesque
writers phrase it.  Life in general might still be sacred, but life in
the particular case of Thomas Mugridge had become very profane indeed.  I
was frightened when I became conscious that I was seeing red, and the
thought flashed through my mind: was I, too, becoming tainted by the
brutality of my environment?—I, who even in the most flagrant crimes had
denied the justice and righteousness of capital punishment?

Fully half-an-hour went by, and then I saw Johnson and Louis in some sort
of altercation.  It ended with Johnson flinging off Louis’s detaining arm
and starting forward.  He crossed the deck, sprang into the fore rigging,
and began to climb.  But the quick eye of Wolf Larsen caught him.

“Here, you, what are you up to?” he cried.

Johnson’s ascent was arrested.  He looked his captain in the eyes and
replied slowly:

“I am going to get that boy down.”

“You’ll get down out of that rigging, and damn lively about it!  D’ye
hear?  Get down!”

Johnson hesitated, but the long years of obedience to the masters of
ships overpowered him, and he dropped sullenly to the deck and went on
forward.

At half after five I went below to set the cabin table, but I hardly knew
what I did, for my eyes and my brain were filled with the vision of a
man, white-faced and trembling, comically like a bug, clinging to the
thrashing gaff.  At six o’clock, when I served supper, going on deck to
get the food from the galley, I saw Harrison, still in the same position.
The conversation at the table was of other things.  Nobody seemed
interested in the wantonly imperilled life.  But making an extra trip to
the galley a little later, I was gladdened by the sight of Harrison
staggering weakly from the rigging to the forecastle scuttle.  He had
finally summoned the courage to descend.

Before closing this incident, I must give a scrap of conversation I had
with Wolf Larsen in the cabin, while I was washing the dishes.

“You were looking squeamish this afternoon,” he began.  “What was the
matter?”

I could see that he knew what had made me possibly as sick as Harrison,
that he was trying to draw me, and I answered, “It was because of the
brutal treatment of that boy.”

He gave a short laugh.  “Like sea-sickness, I suppose.  Some men are
subject to it, and others are not.”

“Not so,” I objected.

“Just so,” he went on.  “The earth is as full of brutality as the sea is
full of motion.  And some men are made sick by the one, and some by the
other.  That’s the only reason.”

“But you, who make a mock of human life, don’t you place any value upon
it whatever?” I demanded.

“Value?  What value?”  He looked at me, and though his eyes were steady
and motionless, there seemed a cynical smile in them.  “What kind of
value?  How do you measure it?  Who values it?”

“I do,” I made answer.

“Then what is it worth to you?  Another man’s life, I mean.  Come now,
what is it worth?”

The value of life?  How could I put a tangible value upon it?  Somehow,
I, who have always had expression, lacked expression when with Wolf
Larsen.  I have since determined that a part of it was due to the man’s
personality, but that the greater part was due to his totally different
outlook.  Unlike other materialists I had met and with whom I had
something in common to start on, I had nothing in common with him.
Perhaps, also, it was the elemental simplicity of his mind that baffled
me.  He drove so directly to the core of the matter, divesting a question
always of all superfluous details, and with such an air of finality, that
I seemed to find myself struggling in deep water, with no footing under
me.  Value of life?  How could I answer the question on the spur of the
moment?  The sacredness of life I had accepted as axiomatic.  That it was
intrinsically valuable was a truism I had never questioned.  But when he
challenged the truism I was speechless.

“We were talking about this yesterday,” he said.  “I held that life was a
ferment, a yeasty something which devoured life that it might live, and
that living was merely successful piggishness.  Why, if there is anything
in supply and demand, life is the cheapest thing in the world.  There is
only so much water, so much earth, so much air; but the life that is
demanding to be born is limitless.  Nature is a spendthrift.  Look at the
fish and their millions of eggs.  For that matter, look at you and me.
In our loins are the possibilities of millions of lives.  Could we but
find time and opportunity and utilize the last bit and every bit of the
unborn life that is in us, we could become the fathers of nations and
populate continents.  Life?  Bah!  It has no value.  Of cheap things it
is the cheapest.  Everywhere it goes begging.  Nature spills it out with
a lavish hand.  Where there is room for one life, she sows a thousand
lives, and it’s life eats life till the strongest and most piggish life
is left.”

“You have read Darwin,” I said.  “But you read him misunderstandingly
when you conclude that the struggle for existence sanctions your wanton
destruction of life.”

He shrugged his shoulders.  “You know you only mean that in relation to
human life, for of the flesh and the fowl and the fish you destroy as
much as I or any other man.  And human life is in no wise different,
though you feel it is and think that you reason why it is.  Why should I
be parsimonious with this life which is cheap and without value?  There
are more sailors than there are ships on the sea for them, more workers
than there are factories or machines for them.  Why, you who live on the
land know that you house your poor people in the slums of cities and
loose famine and pestilence upon them, and that there still remain more
poor people, dying for want of a crust of bread and a bit of meat (which
is life destroyed), than you know what to do with.  Have you ever seen
the London dockers fighting like wild beasts for a chance to work?”

He started for the companion stairs, but turned his head for a final
word.  “Do you know the only value life has is what life puts upon
itself?  And it is of course over-estimated since it is of necessity
prejudiced in its own favour.  Take that man I had aloft.  He held on as
if he were a precious thing, a treasure beyond diamonds or rubies.  To
you?  No.  To me?  Not at all.  To himself?  Yes.  But I do not accept
his estimate.  He sadly overrates himself.  There is plenty more life
demanding to be born.  Had he fallen and dripped his brains upon the deck
like honey from the comb, there would have been no loss to the world.  He
was worth nothing to the world.  The supply is too large.  To himself
only was he of value, and to show how fictitious even this value was,
being dead he is unconscious that he has lost himself.  He alone rated
himself beyond diamonds and rubies.  Diamonds and rubies are gone, spread
out on the deck to be washed away by a bucket of sea-water, and he does
not even know that the diamonds and rubies are gone.  He does not lose
anything, for with the loss of himself he loses the knowledge of loss.
Don’t you see?  And what have you to say?”

“That you are at least consistent,” was all I could say, and I went on
washing the dishes.




CHAPTER VII


At last, after three days of variable winds, we have caught the
north-east trades.  I came on deck, after a good night’s rest in spite of
my poor knee, to find the _Ghost_ foaming along, wing-and-wing, and every
sail drawing except the jibs, with a fresh breeze astern.  Oh, the wonder
of the great trade-wind!  All day we sailed, and all night, and the next
day, and the next, day after day, the wind always astern and blowing
steadily and strong.  The schooner sailed herself.  There was no pulling
and hauling on sheets and tackles, no shifting of topsails, no work at
all for the sailors to do except to steer.  At night when the sun went
down, the sheets were slackened; in the morning, when they yielded up the
damp of the dew and relaxed, they were pulled tight again—and that was
all.

Ten knots, twelve knots, eleven knots, varying from time to time, is the
speed we are making.  And ever out of the north-east the brave wind
blows, driving us on our course two hundred and fifty miles between the
dawns.  It saddens me and gladdens me, the gait with which we are leaving
San Francisco behind and with which we are foaming down upon the tropics.
Each day grows perceptibly warmer.  In the second dog-watch the sailors
come on deck, stripped, and heave buckets of water upon one another from
overside.  Flying-fish are beginning to be seen, and during the night the
watch above scrambles over the deck in pursuit of those that fall aboard.
In the morning, Thomas Mugridge being duly bribed, the galley is
pleasantly areek with the odour of their frying; while dolphin meat is
served fore and aft on such occasions as Johnson catches the blazing
beauties from the bowsprit end.

Johnson seems to spend all his spare time there or aloft at the
crosstrees, watching the _Ghost_ cleaving the water under press of sail.
There is passion, adoration, in his eyes, and he goes about in a sort of
trance, gazing in ecstasy at the swelling sails, the foaming wake, and
the heave and the run of her over the liquid mountains that are moving
with us in stately procession.

The days and nights are “all a wonder and a wild delight,” and though I
have little time from my dreary work, I steal odd moments to gaze and
gaze at the unending glory of what I never dreamed the world possessed.
Above, the sky is stainless blue—blue as the sea itself, which under the
forefoot is of the colour and sheen of azure satin.  All around the
horizon are pale, fleecy clouds, never changing, never moving, like a
silver setting for the flawless turquoise sky.

I do not forget one night, when I should have been asleep, of lying on
the forecastle-head and gazing down at the spectral ripple of foam thrust
aside by the _Ghost’s_ forefoot.  It sounded like the gurgling of a brook
over mossy stones in some quiet dell, and the crooning song of it lured
me away and out of myself till I was no longer Hump the cabin-boy, nor
Van Weyden, the man who had dreamed away thirty-five years among books.
But a voice behind me, the unmistakable voice of Wolf Larsen, strong with
the invincible certitude of the man and mellow with appreciation of the
words he was quoting, aroused me.

   “‘O the blazing tropic night, when the wake’s a welt of light
      That holds the hot sky tame,
   And the steady forefoot snores through the planet-powdered floors
      Where the scared whale flukes in flame.
   Her plates are scarred by the sun, dear lass,
      And her ropes are taut with the dew,
   For we’re booming down on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
      We’re sagging south on the Long Trail—the trail that is always
   new.’”

“Eh, Hump?  How’s it strike you?” he asked, after the due pause which
words and setting demanded.

I looked into his face.  It was aglow with light, as the sea itself, and
the eyes were flashing in the starshine.

“It strikes me as remarkable, to say the least, that you should show
enthusiasm,” I answered coldly.

“Why, man, it’s living! it’s life!” he cried.

“Which is a cheap thing and without value.”  I flung his words at him.

He laughed, and it was the first time I had heard honest mirth in his
voice.

“Ah, I cannot get you to understand, cannot drive it into your head, what
a thing this life is.  Of course life is valueless, except to itself.
And I can tell you that my life is pretty valuable just now—to myself.
It is beyond price, which you will acknowledge is a terrific overrating,
but which I cannot help, for it is the life that is in me that makes the
rating.”

He appeared waiting for the words with which to express the thought that
was in him, and finally went on.

“Do you know, I am filled with a strange uplift; I feel as if all time
were echoing through me, as though all powers were mine.  I know truth,
divine good from evil, right from wrong.  My vision is clear and far.  I
could almost believe in God.  But,” and his voice changed and the light
went out of his face,—“what is this condition in which I find myself?
this joy of living? this exultation of life? this inspiration, I may well
call it?  It is what comes when there is nothing wrong with one’s
digestion, when his stomach is in trim and his appetite has an edge, and
all goes well.  It is the bribe for living, the champagne of the blood,
the effervescence of the ferment—that makes some men think holy thoughts,
and other men to see God or to create him when they cannot see him.  That
is all, the drunkenness of life, the stirring and crawling of the yeast,
the babbling of the life that is insane with consciousness that it is
alive.  And—bah!  To-morrow I shall pay for it as the drunkard pays.  And
I shall know that I must die, at sea most likely, cease crawling of
myself to be all a-crawl with the corruption of the sea; to be fed upon,
to be carrion, to yield up all the strength and movement of my muscles
that it may become strength and movement in fin and scale and the guts of
fishes.  Bah!  And bah! again.  The champagne is already flat.  The
sparkle and bubble has gone out and it is a tasteless drink.”

He left me as suddenly as he had come, springing to the deck with the
weight and softness of a tiger.  The _Ghost_ ploughed on her way.  I
noted the gurgling forefoot was very like a snore, and as I listened to
it the effect of Wolf Larsen’s swift rush from sublime exultation to
despair slowly left me.  Then some deep-water sailor, from the waist of
the ship, lifted a rich tenor voice in the “Song of the Trade Wind”:

   “Oh, I am the wind the seamen love—
      I am steady, and strong, and true;
   They follow my track by the clouds above,
      O’er the fathomless tropic blue.

                                  * * * * *

   Through daylight and dark I follow the bark
      I keep like a hound on her trail;
   I’m strongest at noon, yet under the moon,
      I stiffen the bunt of her sail.”




CHAPTER VIII


Sometimes I think Wolf Larsen mad, or half-mad at least, what of his
strange moods and vagaries.  At other times I take him for a great man, a
genius who has never arrived.  And, finally, I am convinced that he is
the perfect type of the primitive man, born a thousand years or
generations too late and an anachronism in this culminating century of
civilization.  He is certainly an individualist of the most pronounced
type.  Not only that, but he is very lonely.  There is no congeniality
between him and the rest of the men aboard ship.  His tremendous virility
and mental strength wall him apart.  They are more like children to him,
even the hunters, and as children he treats them, descending perforce to
their level and playing with them as a man plays with puppies.  Or else
he probes them with the cruel hand of a vivisectionist, groping about in
their mental processes and examining their souls as though to see of what
soul-stuff is made.

I have seen him a score of times, at table, insulting this hunter or
that, with cool and level eyes and, withal, a certain air of interest,
pondering their actions or replies or petty rages with a curiosity almost
laughable to me who stood onlooker and who understood.  Concerning his
own rages, I am convinced that they are not real, that they are sometimes
experiments, but that in the main they are the habits of a pose or
attitude he has seen fit to take toward his fellow-men.  I know, with the
possible exception of the incident of the dead mate, that I have not seen
him really angry; nor do I wish ever to see him in a genuine rage, when
all the force of him is called into play.

While on the question of vagaries, I shall tell what befell Thomas
Mugridge in the cabin, and at the same time complete an incident upon
which I have already touched once or twice.  The twelve o’clock dinner
was over, one day, and I had just finished putting the cabin in order,
when Wolf Larsen and Thomas Mugridge descended the companion stairs.
Though the cook had a cubby-hole of a state-room opening off from the
cabin, in the cabin itself he had never dared to linger or to be seen,
and he flitted to and fro, once or twice a day, a timid spectre.

“So you know how to play ‘Nap,’” Wolf Larsen was saying in a pleased sort
of voice.  “I might have guessed an Englishman would know.  I learned it
myself in English ships.”

Thomas Mugridge was beside himself, a blithering imbecile, so pleased was
he at chumming thus with the captain.  The little airs he put on and the
painful striving to assume the easy carriage of a man born to a dignified
place in life would have been sickening had they not been ludicrous.  He
quite ignored my presence, though I credited him with being simply unable
to see me.  His pale, wishy-washy eyes were swimming like lazy summer
seas, though what blissful visions they beheld were beyond my
imagination.

“Get the cards, Hump,” Wolf Larsen ordered, as they took seats at the
table.  “And bring out the cigars and the whisky you’ll find in my
berth.”

I returned with the articles in time to hear the Cockney hinting broadly
that there was a mystery about him, that he might be a gentleman’s son
gone wrong or something or other; also, that he was a remittance man and
was paid to keep away from England—“p’yed ’ansomely, sir,” was the way he
put it; “p’yed ’ansomely to sling my ’ook an’ keep slingin’ it.”

I had brought the customary liquor glasses, but Wolf Larsen frowned,
shook his head, and signalled with his hands for me to bring the
tumblers.  These he filled two-thirds full with undiluted whisky—“a
gentleman’s drink?” quoth Thomas Mugridge,—and they clinked their glasses
to the glorious game of “Nap,” lighted cigars, and fell to shuffling and
dealing the cards.

They played for money.  They increased the amounts of the bets.  They
drank whisky, they drank it neat, and I fetched more.  I do not know
whether Wolf Larsen cheated or not,—a thing he was thoroughly capable of
doing,—but he won steadily.  The cook made repeated journeys to his bunk
for money.  Each time he performed the journey with greater swagger, but
he never brought more than a few dollars at a time.  He grew maudlin,
familiar, could hardly see the cards or sit upright.  As a preliminary to
another journey to his bunk, he hooked Wolf Larsen’s buttonhole with a
greasy forefinger and vacuously proclaimed and reiterated, “I got money,
I got money, I tell yer, an’ I’m a gentleman’s son.”

Wolf Larsen was unaffected by the drink, yet he drank glass for glass,
and if anything his glasses were fuller.  There was no change in him.  He
did not appear even amused at the other’s antics.

In the end, with loud protestations that he could lose like a gentleman,
the cook’s last money was staked on the game—and lost.  Whereupon he
leaned his head on his hands and wept.  Wolf Larsen looked curiously at
him, as though about to probe and vivisect him, then changed his mind, as
from the foregone conclusion that there was nothing there to probe.

“Hump,” he said to me, elaborately polite, “kindly take Mr. Mugridge’s
arm and help him up on deck.  He is not feeling very well.”

“And tell Johnson to douse him with a few buckets of salt water,” he
added, in a lower tone for my ear alone.

I left Mr. Mugridge on deck, in the hands of a couple of grinning sailors
who had been told off for the purpose.  Mr. Mugridge was sleepily
spluttering that he was a gentleman’s son.  But as I descended the
companion stairs to clear the table I heard him shriek as the first
bucket of water struck him.

Wolf Larsen was counting his winnings.

“One hundred and eighty-five dollars even,” he said aloud.  “Just as I
thought.  The beggar came aboard without a cent.”

“And what you have won is mine, sir,” I said boldly.

He favoured me with a quizzical smile.  “Hump, I have studied some
grammar in my time, and I think your tenses are tangled.  ‘Was mine,’ you
should have said, not ’is mine.’”

“It is a question, not of grammar, but of ethics,” I answered.

It was possibly a minute before he spoke.

“D’ye know, Hump,” he said, with a slow seriousness which had in it an
indefinable strain of sadness, “that this is the first time I have heard
the word ‘ethics’ in the mouth of a man.  You and I are the only men on
this ship who know its meaning.”

“At one time in my life,” he continued, after another pause, “I dreamed
that I might some day talk with men who used such language, that I might
lift myself out of the place in life in which I had been born, and hold
conversation and mingle with men who talked about just such things as
ethics.  And this is the first time I have ever heard the word
pronounced.  Which is all by the way, for you are wrong.  It is a
question neither of grammar nor ethics, but of fact.”

“I understand,” I said.  “The fact is that you have the money.”

His face brightened.  He seemed pleased at my perspicacity.  “But it is
avoiding the real question,” I continued, “which is one of right.”

“Ah,” he remarked, with a wry pucker of his mouth, “I see you still
believe in such things as right and wrong.”

“But don’t you?—at all?” I demanded.

“Not the least bit.  Might is right, and that is all there is to it.
Weakness is wrong.  Which is a very poor way of saying that it is good
for oneself to be strong, and evil for oneself to be weak—or better yet,
it is pleasurable to be strong, because of the profits; painful to be
weak, because of the penalties.  Just now the possession of this money is
a pleasurable thing.  It is good for one to possess it.  Being able to
possess it, I wrong myself and the life that is in me if I give it to you
and forego the pleasure of possessing it.”

“But you wrong me by withholding it,” I objected.

“Not at all.  One man cannot wrong another man.  He can only wrong
himself.  As I see it, I do wrong always when I consider the interests of
others.  Don’t you see?  How can two particles of the yeast wrong each
other by striving to devour each other?  It is their inborn heritage to
strive to devour, and to strive not to be devoured.  When they depart
from this they sin.”

“Then you don’t believe in altruism?” I asked.

He received the word as if it had a familiar ring, though he pondered it
thoughtfully.  “Let me see, it means something about coöperation, doesn’t
it?”

“Well, in a way there has come to be a sort of connection,” I answered
unsurprised by this time at such gaps in his vocabulary, which, like his
knowledge, was the acquirement of a self-read, self-educated man, whom no
one had directed in his studies, and who had thought much and talked
little or not at all.  “An altruistic act is an act performed for the
welfare of others.  It is unselfish, as opposed to an act performed for
self, which is selfish.”

He nodded his head.  “Oh, yes, I remember it now.  I ran across it in
Spencer.”

“Spencer!” I cried.  “Have you read him?”

“Not very much,” was his confession.  “I understood quite a good deal of
_First Principles_, but his _Biology_ took the wind out of my sails, and
his _Psychology_ left me butting around in the doldrums for many a day.
I honestly could not understand what he was driving at.  I put it down to
mental deficiency on my part, but since then I have decided that it was
for want of preparation.  I had no proper basis.  Only Spencer and myself
know how hard I hammered.  But I did get something out of his _Data of
Ethics_.  There’s where I ran across ‘altruism,’ and I remember now how
it was used.”

I wondered what this man could have got from such a work.  Spencer I
remembered enough to know that altruism was imperative to his ideal of
highest conduct.  Wolf Larsen, evidently, had sifted the great
philosopher’s teachings, rejecting and selecting according to his needs
and desires.

“What else did you run across?” I asked.

His brows drew in slightly with the mental effort of suitably phrasing
thoughts which he had never before put into speech.  I felt an elation of
spirit.  I was groping into his soul-stuff as he made a practice of
groping in the soul-stuff of others.  I was exploring virgin territory.
A strange, a terribly strange, region was unrolling itself before my
eyes.

“In as few words as possible,” he began, “Spencer puts it something like
this: First, a man must act for his own benefit—to do this is to be moral
and good.  Next, he must act for the benefit of his children.  And third,
he must act for the benefit of his race.”

“And the highest, finest, right conduct,” I interjected, “is that act
which benefits at the same time the man, his children, and his race.”

“I wouldn’t stand for that,” he replied.  “Couldn’t see the necessity for
it, nor the common sense.  I cut out the race and the children.  I would
sacrifice nothing for them.  It’s just so much slush and sentiment, and
you must see it yourself, at least for one who does not believe in
eternal life.  With immortality before me, altruism would be a paying
business proposition.  I might elevate my soul to all kinds of altitudes.
But with nothing eternal before me but death, given for a brief spell
this yeasty crawling and squirming which is called life, why, it would be
immoral for me to perform any act that was a sacrifice.  Any sacrifice
that makes me lose one crawl or squirm is foolish,—and not only foolish,
for it is a wrong against myself and a wicked thing.  I must not lose one
crawl or squirm if I am to get the most out of the ferment.  Nor will the
eternal movelessness that is coming to me be made easier or harder by the
sacrifices or selfishnesses of the time when I was yeasty and acrawl.”

“Then you are an individualist, a materialist, and, logically, a
hedonist.”

“Big words,” he smiled.  “But what is a hedonist?”

He nodded agreement when I had given the definition.  “And you are also,”
I continued, “a man one could not trust in the least thing where it was
possible for a selfish interest to intervene?”

“Now you’re beginning to understand,” he said, brightening.

“You are a man utterly without what the world calls morals?”

“That’s it.”

“A man of whom to be always afraid—”

“That’s the way to put it.”

“As one is afraid of a snake, or a tiger, or a shark?”

“Now you know me,” he said.  “And you know me as I am generally known.
Other men call me ‘Wolf.’”

“You are a sort of monster,” I added audaciously, “a Caliban who has
pondered Setebos, and who acts as you act, in idle moments, by whim and
fancy.”

His brow clouded at the allusion.  He did not understand, and I quickly
learned that he did not know the poem.

“I’m just reading Browning,” he confessed, “and it’s pretty tough.  I
haven’t got very far along, and as it is I’ve about lost my bearings.”

Not to be tiresome, I shall say that I fetched the book from his
state-room and read “Caliban” aloud.  He was delighted.  It was a
primitive mode of reasoning and of looking at things that he understood
thoroughly.  He interrupted again and again with comment and criticism.
When I finished, he had me read it over a second time, and a third.  We
fell into discussion—philosophy, science, evolution, religion.  He
betrayed the inaccuracies of the self-read man, and, it must be granted,
the sureness and directness of the primitive mind.  The very simplicity
of his reasoning was its strength, and his materialism was far more
compelling than the subtly complex materialism of Charley Furuseth.  Not
that I—a confirmed and, as Furuseth phrased it, a temperamental
idealist—was to be compelled; but that Wolf Larsen stormed the last
strongholds of my faith with a vigour that received respect, while not
accorded conviction.

Time passed.  Supper was at hand and the table not laid.  I became
restless and anxious, and when Thomas Mugridge glared down the
companion-way, sick and angry of countenance, I prepared to go about my
duties.  But Wolf Larsen cried out to him:

“Cooky, you’ve got to hustle to-night.  I’m busy with Hump, and you’ll do
the best you can without him.”

And again the unprecedented was established.  That night I sat at table
with the captain and the hunters, while Thomas Mugridge waited on us and
washed the dishes afterward—a whim, a Caliban-mood of Wolf Larsen’s, and
one I foresaw would bring me trouble.  In the meantime we talked and
talked, much to the disgust of the hunters, who could not understand a
word.




CHAPTER IX


Three days of rest, three blessed days of rest, are what I had with Wolf
Larsen, eating at the cabin table and doing nothing but discuss life,
literature, and the universe, the while Thomas Mugridge fumed and raged
and did my work as well as his own.

“Watch out for squalls, is all I can say to you,” was Louis’s warning,
given during a spare half-hour on deck while Wolf Larsen was engaged in
straightening out a row among the hunters.

“Ye can’t tell what’ll be happenin’,” Louis went on, in response to my
query for more definite information.  “The man’s as contrary as air
currents or water currents.  You can never guess the ways iv him.  ’Tis
just as you’re thinkin’ you know him and are makin’ a favourable slant
along him, that he whirls around, dead ahead and comes howlin’ down upon
you and a-rippin’ all iv your fine-weather sails to rags.”

So I was not altogether surprised when the squall foretold by Louis smote
me.  We had been having a heated discussion,—upon life, of course,—and,
grown over-bold, I was passing stiff strictures upon Wolf Larsen and the
life of Wolf Larsen.  In fact, I was vivisecting him and turning over his
soul-stuff as keenly and thoroughly as it was his custom to do it to
others.  It may be a weakness of mine that I have an incisive way of
speech; but I threw all restraint to the winds and cut and slashed until
the whole man of him was snarling.  The dark sun-bronze of his face went
black with wrath, his eyes were ablaze.  There was no clearness or sanity
in them—nothing but the terrific rage of a madman.  It was the wolf in
him that I saw, and a mad wolf at that.

He sprang for me with a half-roar, gripping my arm.  I had steeled myself
to brazen it out, though I was trembling inwardly; but the enormous
strength of the man was too much for my fortitude.  He had gripped me by
the biceps with his single hand, and when that grip tightened I wilted
and shrieked aloud.  My feet went out from under me.  I simply could not
stand upright and endure the agony.  The muscles refused their duty.  The
pain was too great.  My biceps was being crushed to a pulp.

He seemed to recover himself, for a lucid gleam came into his eyes, and
he relaxed his hold with a short laugh that was more like a growl.  I
fell to the floor, feeling very faint, while he sat down, lighted a
cigar, and watched me as a cat watches a mouse.  As I writhed about I
could see in his eyes that curiosity I had so often noted, that wonder
and perplexity, that questing, that everlasting query of his as to what
it was all about.

I finally crawled to my feet and ascended the companion stairs.  Fair
weather was over, and there was nothing left but to return to the galley.
My left arm was numb, as though paralysed, and days passed before I could
use it, while weeks went by before the last stiffness and pain went out
of it.  And he had done nothing but put his hand upon my arm and squeeze.
There had been no wrenching or jerking.  He had just closed his hand with
a steady pressure.  What he might have done I did not fully realize till
next day, when he put his head into the galley, and, as a sign of renewed
friendliness, asked me how my arm was getting on.

“It might have been worse,” he smiled.

I was peeling potatoes.  He picked one up from the pan.  It was
fair-sized, firm, and unpeeled.  He closed his hand upon it, squeezed,
and the potato squirted out between his fingers in mushy streams.  The
pulpy remnant he dropped back into the pan and turned away, and I had a
sharp vision of how it might have fared with me had the monster put his
real strength upon me.

But the three days’ rest was good in spite of it all, for it had given my
knee the very chance it needed.  It felt much better, the swelling had
materially decreased, and the cap seemed descending into its proper
place.  Also, the three days’ rest brought the trouble I had foreseen.
It was plainly Thomas Mugridge’s intention to make me pay for those three
days.  He treated me vilely, cursed me continually, and heaped his own
work upon me.  He even ventured to raise his fist to me, but I was
becoming animal-like myself, and I snarled in his face so terribly that
it must have frightened him back.  It is no pleasant picture I can
conjure up of myself, Humphrey Van Weyden, in that noisome ship’s galley,
crouched in a corner over my task, my face raised to the face of the
creature about to strike me, my lips lifted and snarling like a dog’s, my
eyes gleaming with fear and helplessness and the courage that comes of
fear and helplessness.  I do not like the picture.  It reminds me too
strongly of a rat in a trap.  I do not care to think of it; but it was
effective, for the threatened blow did not descend.

Thomas Mugridge backed away, glaring as hatefully and viciously as I
glared.  A pair of beasts is what we were, penned together and showing
our teeth.  He was a coward, afraid to strike me because I had not
quailed sufficiently in advance; so he chose a new way to intimidate me.
There was only one galley knife that, as a knife, amounted to anything.
This, through many years of service and wear, had acquired a long, lean
blade.  It was unusually cruel-looking, and at first I had shuddered
every time I used it.  The cook borrowed a stone from Johansen and
proceeded to sharpen the knife.  He did it with great ostentation,
glancing significantly at me the while.  He whetted it up and down all
day long.  Every odd moment he could find he had the knife and stone out
and was whetting away.  The steel acquired a razor edge.  He tried it
with the ball of his thumb or across the nail.  He shaved hairs from the
back of his hand, glanced along the edge with microscopic acuteness, and
found, or feigned that he found, always, a slight inequality in its edge
somewhere.  Then he would put it on the stone again and whet, whet, whet,
till I could have laughed aloud, it was so very ludicrous.

It was also serious, for I learned that he was capable of using it, that
under all his cowardice there was a courage of cowardice, like mine, that
would impel him to do the very thing his whole nature protested against
doing and was afraid of doing.  “Cooky’s sharpening his knife for Hump,”
was being whispered about among the sailors, and some of them twitted him
about it.  This he took in good part, and was really pleased, nodding his
head with direful foreknowledge and mystery, until George Leach, the
erstwhile cabin-boy, ventured some rough pleasantry on the subject.

Now it happened that Leach was one of the sailors told off to douse
Mugridge after his game of cards with the captain.  Leach had evidently
done his task with a thoroughness that Mugridge had not forgiven, for
words followed and evil names involving smirched ancestries.  Mugridge
menaced with the knife he was sharpening for me.  Leach laughed and
hurled more of his Telegraph Hill Billingsgate, and before either he or I
knew what had happened, his right arm had been ripped open from elbow to
wrist by a quick slash of the knife.  The cook backed away, a fiendish
expression on his face, the knife held before him in a position of
defence.  But Leach took it quite calmly, though blood was spouting upon
the deck as generously as water from a fountain.

“I’m goin’ to get you, Cooky,” he said, “and I’ll get you hard.  And I
won’t be in no hurry about it.  You’ll be without that knife when I come
for you.”

So saying, he turned and walked quietly forward.  Mugridge’s face was
livid with fear at what he had done and at what he might expect sooner or
later from the man he had stabbed.  But his demeanour toward me was more
ferocious than ever.  In spite of his fear at the reckoning he must
expect to pay for what he had done, he could see that it had been an
object-lesson to me, and he became more domineering and exultant.  Also
there was a lust in him, akin to madness, which had come with sight of
the blood he had drawn.  He was beginning to see red in whatever
direction he looked.  The psychology of it is sadly tangled, and yet I
could read the workings of his mind as clearly as though it were a
printed book.

Several days went by, the _Ghost_ still foaming down the trades, and I
could swear I saw madness growing in Thomas Mugridge’s eyes.  And I
confess that I became afraid, very much afraid.  Whet, whet, whet, it
went all day long.  The look in his eyes as he felt the keen edge and
glared at me was positively carnivorous.  I was afraid to turn my
shoulder to him, and when I left the galley I went out backwards—to the
amusement of the sailors and hunters, who made a point of gathering in
groups to witness my exit.  The strain was too great.  I sometimes
thought my mind would give way under it—a meet thing on this ship of
madmen and brutes.  Every hour, every minute of my existence was in
jeopardy.  I was a human soul in distress, and yet no soul, fore or aft,
betrayed sufficient sympathy to come to my aid.  At times I thought of
throwing myself on the mercy of Wolf Larsen, but the vision of the
mocking devil in his eyes that questioned life and sneered at it would
come strong upon me and compel me to refrain.  At other times I seriously
contemplated suicide, and the whole force of my hopeful philosophy was
required to keep me from going over the side in the darkness of night.

Several times Wolf Larsen tried to inveigle me into discussion, but I
gave him short answers and eluded him.  Finally, he commanded me to
resume my seat at the cabin table for a time and let the cook do my work.
Then I spoke frankly, telling him what I was enduring from Thomas
Mugridge because of the three days of favouritism which had been shown
me.  Wolf Larsen regarded me with smiling eyes.

“So you’re afraid, eh?” he sneered.

“Yes,” I said defiantly and honestly, “I am afraid.”

“That’s the way with you fellows,” he cried, half angrily,
“sentimentalizing about your immortal souls and afraid to die.  At sight
of a sharp knife and a cowardly Cockney the clinging of life to life
overcomes all your fond foolishness.  Why, my dear fellow, you will live
for ever.  You are a god, and God cannot be killed.  Cooky cannot hurt
you.  You are sure of your resurrection.  What’s there to be afraid of?

“You have eternal life before you.  You are a millionaire in immortality,
and a millionaire whose fortune cannot be lost, whose fortune is less
perishable than the stars and as lasting as space or time.  It is
impossible for you to diminish your principal.  Immortality is a thing
without beginning or end.  Eternity is eternity, and though you die here
and now you will go on living somewhere else and hereafter.  And it is
all very beautiful, this shaking off of the flesh and soaring of the
imprisoned spirit.  Cooky cannot hurt you.  He can only give you a boost
on the path you eternally must tread.

“Or, if you do not wish to be boosted just yet, why not boost Cooky?
According to your ideas, he, too, must be an immortal millionaire.  You
cannot bankrupt him.  His paper will always circulate at par.  You cannot
diminish the length of his living by killing him, for he is without
beginning or end.  He’s bound to go on living, somewhere, somehow.  Then
boost him.  Stick a knife in him and let his spirit free.  As it is, it’s
in a nasty prison, and you’ll do him only a kindness by breaking down the
door.  And who knows?—it may be a very beautiful spirit that will go
soaring up into the blue from that ugly carcass.  Boost him along, and
I’ll promote you to his place, and he’s getting forty-five dollars a
month.”

It was plain that I could look for no help or mercy from Wolf Larsen.
Whatever was to be done I must do for myself; and out of the courage of
fear I evolved the plan of fighting Thomas Mugridge with his own weapons.
I borrowed a whetstone from Johansen.  Louis, the boat-steerer, had
already begged me for condensed milk and sugar.  The lazarette, where
such delicacies were stored, was situated beneath the cabin floor.
Watching my chance, I stole five cans of the milk, and that night, when
it was Louis’s watch on deck, I traded them with him for a dirk as lean
and cruel-looking as Thomas Mugridge’s vegetable knife.  It was rusty and
dull, but I turned the grindstone while Louis gave it an edge.  I slept
more soundly than usual that night.

Next morning, after breakfast, Thomas Mugridge began his whet, whet,
whet.  I glanced warily at him, for I was on my knees taking the ashes
from the stove.  When I returned from throwing them overside, he was
talking to Harrison, whose honest yokel’s face was filled with
fascination and wonder.

“Yes,” Mugridge was saying, “an’ wot does ’is worship do but give me two
years in Reading.  But blimey if I cared.  The other mug was fixed
plenty.  Should ’a seen ’im.  Knife just like this.  I stuck it in, like
into soft butter, an’ the w’y ’e squealed was better’n a tu-penny gaff.”
He shot a glance in my direction to see if I was taking it in, and went
on.  “‘I didn’t mean it Tommy,’ ’e was snifflin’; ‘so ’elp me Gawd, I
didn’t mean it!’  ‘I’ll fix yer bloody well right,’ I sez, an’ kept right
after ’im.  I cut ’im in ribbons, that’s wot I did, an’ ’e a-squealin’
all the time.  Once ’e got ’is ’and on the knife an’ tried to ’old it.
‘Ad ’is fingers around it, but I pulled it through, cuttin’ to the bone.
O, ’e was a sight, I can tell yer.”

A call from the mate interrupted the gory narrative, and Harrison went
aft.  Mugridge sat down on the raised threshold to the galley and went on
with his knife-sharpening.  I put the shovel away and calmly sat down on
the coal-box facing him.  He favoured me with a vicious stare.  Still
calmly, though my heart was going pitapat, I pulled out Louis’s dirk and
began to whet it on the stone.  I had looked for almost any sort of
explosion on the Cockney’s part, but to my surprise he did not appear
aware of what I was doing.  He went on whetting his knife.  So did I.
And for two hours we sat there, face to face, whet, whet, whet, till the
news of it spread abroad and half the ship’s company was crowding the
galley doors to see the sight.

Encouragement and advice were freely tendered, and Jock Horner, the
quiet, self-spoken hunter who looked as though he would not harm a mouse,
advised me to leave the ribs alone and to thrust upward for the abdomen,
at the same time giving what he called the “Spanish twist” to the blade.
Leach, his bandaged arm prominently to the fore, begged me to leave a few
remnants of the cook for him; and Wolf Larsen paused once or twice at the
break of the poop to glance curiously at what must have been to him a
stirring and crawling of the yeasty thing he knew as life.

And I make free to say that for the time being life assumed the same
sordid values to me.  There was nothing pretty about it, nothing
divine—only two cowardly moving things that sat whetting steel upon
stone, and a group of other moving things, cowardly and otherwise, that
looked on.  Half of them, I am sure, were anxious to see us shedding each
other’s blood.  It would have been entertainment.  And I do not think
there was one who would have interfered had we closed in a
death-struggle.

On the other hand, the whole thing was laughable and childish.  Whet,
whet, whet,—Humphrey Van Weyden sharpening his knife in a ship’s galley
and trying its edge with his thumb!  Of all situations this was the most
inconceivable.  I know that my own kind could not have believed it
possible.  I had not been called “Sissy” Van Weyden all my days without
reason, and that “Sissy” Van Weyden should be capable of doing this thing
was a revelation to Humphrey Van Weyden, who knew not whether to be
exultant or ashamed.

But nothing happened.  At the end of two hours Thomas Mugridge put away
knife and stone and held out his hand.

“Wot’s the good of mykin’ a ’oly show of ourselves for them mugs?” he
demanded.  “They don’t love us, an’ bloody well glad they’d be a-seein’
us cuttin’ our throats.  Yer not ’arf bad, ’Ump!  You’ve got spunk, as
you Yanks s’y, an’ I like yer in a w’y.  So come on an’ shyke.”

Coward that I might be, I was less a coward than he.  It was a distinct
victory I had gained, and I refused to forego any of it by shaking his
detestable hand.

“All right,” he said pridelessly, “tyke it or leave it, I’ll like yer
none the less for it.”  And to save his face he turned fiercely upon the
onlookers.  “Get outa my galley-doors, you bloomin’ swabs!”

This command was reinforced by a steaming kettle of water, and at sight
of it the sailors scrambled out of the way.  This was a sort of victory
for Thomas Mugridge, and enabled him to accept more gracefully the defeat
I had given him, though, of course, he was too discreet to attempt to
drive the hunters away.

“I see Cooky’s finish,” I heard Smoke say to Horner.

“You bet,” was the reply.  “Hump runs the galley from now on, and Cooky
pulls in his horns.”

Mugridge heard and shot a swift glance at me, but I gave no sign that the
conversation had reached me.  I had not thought my victory was so
far-reaching and complete, but I resolved to let go nothing I had gained.
As the days went by, Smoke’s prophecy was verified.  The Cockney became
more humble and slavish to me than even to Wolf Larsen.  I mistered him
and sirred him no longer, washed no more greasy pots, and peeled no more
potatoes.  I did my own work, and my own work only, and when and in what
fashion I saw fit.  Also I carried the dirk in a sheath at my hip,
sailor-fashion, and maintained toward Thomas Mugridge a constant attitude
which was composed of equal parts of domineering, insult, and contempt.




CHAPTER X


My intimacy with Wolf Larsen increases—if by intimacy may be denoted
those relations which exist between master and man, or, better yet,
between king and jester.  I am to him no more than a toy, and he values
me no more than a child values a toy.  My function is to amuse, and so
long as I amuse all goes well; but let him become bored, or let him have
one of his black moods come upon him, and at once I am relegated from
cabin table to galley, while, at the same time, I am fortunate to escape
with my life and a whole body.

The loneliness of the man is slowly being borne in upon me.  There is not
a man aboard but hates or fears him, nor is there a man whom he does not
despise.  He seems consuming with the tremendous power that is in him and
that seems never to have found adequate expression in works.  He is as
Lucifer would be, were that proud spirit banished to a society of
soulless, Tomlinsonian ghosts.

This loneliness is bad enough in itself, but, to make it worse, he is
oppressed by the primal melancholy of the race.  Knowing him, I review
the old Scandinavian myths with clearer understanding.  The
white-skinned, fair-haired savages who created that terrible pantheon
were of the same fibre as he.  The frivolity of the laughter-loving
Latins is no part of him.  When he laughs it is from a humour that is
nothing else than ferocious.  But he laughs rarely; he is too often sad.
And it is a sadness as deep-reaching as the roots of the race.  It is the
race heritage, the sadness which has made the race sober-minded,
clean-lived and fanatically moral, and which, in this latter connection,
has culminated among the English in the Reformed Church and Mrs. Grundy.

In point of fact, the chief vent to this primal melancholy has been
religion in its more agonizing forms.  But the compensations of such
religion are denied Wolf Larsen.  His brutal materialism will not permit
it.  So, when his blue moods come on, nothing remains for him, but to be
devilish.  Were he not so terrible a man, I could sometimes feel sorry
for him, as instance three mornings ago, when I went into his stateroom
to fill his water-bottle and came unexpectedly upon him.  He did not see
me.  His head was buried in his hands, and his shoulders were heaving
convulsively as with sobs.  He seemed torn by some mighty grief.  As I
softly withdrew I could hear him groaning, “God!  God!  God!”  Not that
he was calling upon God; it was a mere expletive, but it came from his
soul.

At dinner he asked the hunters for a remedy for headache, and by evening,
strong man that he was, he was half-blind and reeling about the cabin.

“I’ve never been sick in my life, Hump,” he said, as I guided him to his
room.  “Nor did I ever have a headache except the time my head was
healing after having been laid open for six inches by a capstan-bar.”

For three days this blinding headache lasted, and he suffered as wild
animals suffer, as it seemed the way on ship to suffer, without plaint,
without sympathy, utterly alone.

This morning, however, on entering his state-room to make the bed and put
things in order, I found him well and hard at work.  Table and bunk were
littered with designs and calculations.  On a large transparent sheet,
compass and square in hand, he was copying what appeared to be a scale of
some sort or other.

“Hello, Hump,” he greeted me genially.  “I’m just finishing the finishing
touches.  Want to see it work?”

“But what is it?” I asked.

“A labour-saving device for mariners, navigation reduced to kindergarten
simplicity,” he answered gaily.  “From to-day a child will be able to
navigate a ship.  No more long-winded calculations.  All you need is one
star in the sky on a dirty night to know instantly where you are.  Look.
I place the transparent scale on this star-map, revolving the scale on
the North Pole.  On the scale I’ve worked out the circles of altitude and
the lines of bearing.  All I do is to put it on a star, revolve the scale
till it is opposite those figures on the map underneath, and presto!
there you are, the ship’s precise location!”

There was a ring of triumph in his voice, and his eyes, clear blue this
morning as the sea, were sparkling with light.

“You must be well up in mathematics,” I said.  “Where did you go to
school?”

“Never saw the inside of one, worse luck,” was the answer.  “I had to dig
it out for myself.”

“And why do you think I have made this thing?” he demanded, abruptly.
“Dreaming to leave footprints on the sands of time?”  He laughed one of
his horrible mocking laughs.  “Not at all.  To get it patented, to make
money from it, to revel in piggishness with all night in while other men
do the work.  That’s my purpose.  Also, I have enjoyed working it out.”

“The creative joy,” I murmured.

“I guess that’s what it ought to be called.  Which is another way of
expressing the joy of life in that it is alive, the triumph of movement
over matter, of the quick over the dead, the pride of the yeast because
it is yeast and crawls.”

I threw up my hands with helpless disapproval of his inveterate
materialism and went about making the bed.  He continued copying lines
and figures upon the transparent scale.  It was a task requiring the
utmost nicety and precision, and I could not but admire the way he
tempered his strength to the fineness and delicacy of the need.

When I had finished the bed, I caught myself looking at him in a
fascinated sort of way.  He was certainly a handsome man—beautiful in the
masculine sense.  And again, with never-failing wonder, I remarked the
total lack of viciousness, or wickedness, or sinfulness in his face.  It
was the face, I am convinced, of a man who did no wrong.  And by this I
do not wish to be misunderstood.  What I mean is that it was the face of
a man who either did nothing contrary to the dictates of his conscience,
or who had no conscience.  I am inclined to the latter way of accounting
for it.  He was a magnificent atavism, a man so purely primitive that he
was of the type that came into the world before the development of the
moral nature.  He was not immoral, but merely unmoral.

As I have said, in the masculine sense his was a beautiful face.
Smooth-shaven, every line was distinct, and it was cut as clear and sharp
as a cameo; while sea and sun had tanned the naturally fair skin to a
dark bronze which bespoke struggle and battle and added both to his
savagery and his beauty.  The lips were full, yet possessed of the
firmness, almost harshness, which is characteristic of thin lips.  The
set of his mouth, his chin, his jaw, was likewise firm or harsh, with all
the fierceness and indomitableness of the male—the nose also.  It was the
nose of a being born to conquer and command.  It just hinted of the eagle
beak.  It might have been Grecian, it might have been Roman, only it was
a shade too massive for the one, a shade too delicate for the other.  And
while the whole face was the incarnation of fierceness and strength, the
primal melancholy from which he suffered seemed to greaten the lines of
mouth and eye and brow, seemed to give a largeness and completeness which
otherwise the face would have lacked.

And so I caught myself standing idly and studying him.  I cannot say how
greatly the man had come to interest me.  Who was he?  What was he?  How
had he happened to be?  All powers seemed his, all potentialities—why,
then, was he no more than the obscure master of a seal-hunting schooner
with a reputation for frightful brutality amongst the men who hunted
seals?

My curiosity burst from me in a flood of speech.

“Why is it that you have not done great things in this world?  With the
power that is yours you might have risen to any height.  Unpossessed of
conscience or moral instinct, you might have mastered the world, broken
it to your hand.  And yet here you are, at the top of your life, where
diminishing and dying begin, living an obscure and sordid existence,
hunting sea animals for the satisfaction of woman’s vanity and love of
decoration, revelling in a piggishness, to use your own words, which is
anything and everything except splendid.  Why, with all that wonderful
strength, have you not done something?  There was nothing to stop you,
nothing that could stop you.  What was wrong?  Did you lack ambition?
Did you fall under temptation?  What was the matter?  What was the
matter?”

He had lifted his eyes to me at the commencement of my outburst, and
followed me complacently until I had done and stood before him breathless
and dismayed.  He waited a moment, as though seeking where to begin, and
then said:

“Hump, do you know the parable of the sower who went forth to sow?  If
you will remember, some of the seed fell upon stony places, where there
was not much earth, and forthwith they sprung up because they had no
deepness of earth.  And when the sun was up they were scorched, and
because they had no root they withered away.  And some fell among thorns,
and the thorns sprung up and choked them.”

“Well?” I said.

“Well?” he queried, half petulantly.  “It was not well.  I was one of
those seeds.”

He dropped his head to the scale and resumed the copying.  I finished my
work and had opened the door to leave, when he spoke to me.

“Hump, if you will look on the west coast of the map of Norway you will
see an indentation called Romsdal Fiord.  I was born within a hundred
miles of that stretch of water.  But I was not born Norwegian.  I am a
Dane.  My father and mother were Danes, and how they ever came to that
bleak bight of land on the west coast I do not know.  I never heard.
Outside of that there is nothing mysterious.  They were poor people and
unlettered.  They came of generations of poor unlettered people—peasants
of the sea who sowed their sons on the waves as has been their custom
since time began.  There is no more to tell.”

“But there is,” I objected.  “It is still obscure to me.”

“What can I tell you?” he demanded, with a recrudescence of fierceness.
“Of the meagreness of a child’s life? of fish diet and coarse living? of
going out with the boats from the time I could crawl? of my brothers, who
went away one by one to the deep-sea farming and never came back? of
myself, unable to read or write, cabin-boy at the mature age of ten on
the coastwise, old-country ships? of the rough fare and rougher usage,
where kicks and blows were bed and breakfast and took the place of
speech, and fear and hatred and pain were my only soul-experiences?  I do
not care to remember.  A madness comes up in my brain even now as I think
of it.  But there were coastwise skippers I would have returned and
killed when a man’s strength came to me, only the lines of my life were
cast at the time in other places.  I did return, not long ago, but
unfortunately the skippers were dead, all but one, a mate in the old
days, a skipper when I met him, and when I left him a cripple who would
never walk again.”

“But you who read Spencer and Darwin and have never seen the inside of a
school, how did you learn to read and write?” I queried.

“In the English merchant service.  Cabin-boy at twelve, ship’s boy at
fourteen, ordinary seaman at sixteen, able seaman at seventeen, and cock
of the fo’c’sle, infinite ambition and infinite loneliness, receiving
neither help nor sympathy, I did it all for myself—navigation,
mathematics, science, literature, and what not.  And of what use has it
been?  Master and owner of a ship at the top of my life, as you say, when
I am beginning to diminish and die.  Paltry, isn’t it?  And when the sun
was up I was scorched, and because I had no root I withered away.”

“But history tells of slaves who rose to the purple,” I chided.

“And history tells of opportunities that came to the slaves who rose to
the purple,” he answered grimly.  “No man makes opportunity.  All the
great men ever did was to know it when it came to them.  The Corsican
knew.  I have dreamed as greatly as the Corsican.  I should have known
the opportunity, but it never came.  The thorns sprung up and choked me.
And, Hump, I can tell you that you know more about me than any living
man, except my own brother.”

“And what is he?  And where is he?”

“Master of the steamship _Macedonia_, seal-hunter,” was the answer.  “We
will meet him most probably on the Japan coast.  Men call him ‘Death’
Larsen.”

“Death Larsen!” I involuntarily cried.  “Is he like you?”

“Hardly.  He is a lump of an animal without any head.  He has all my—my—”

“Brutishness,” I suggested.

“Yes,—thank you for the word,—all my brutishness, but he can scarcely
read or write.”

“And he has never philosophized on life,” I added.

“No,” Wolf Larsen answered, with an indescribable air of sadness.  “And
he is all the happier for leaving life alone.  He is too busy living it
to think about it.  My mistake was in ever opening the books.”




CHAPTER XI


The _Ghost_ has attained the southernmost point of the arc she is
describing across the Pacific, and is already beginning to edge away to
the west and north toward some lone island, it is rumoured, where she
will fill her water-casks before proceeding to the season’s hunt along
the coast of Japan.  The hunters have experimented and practised with
their rifles and shotguns till they are satisfied, and the boat-pullers
and steerers have made their spritsails, bound the oars and rowlocks in
leather and sennit so that they will make no noise when creeping on the
seals, and put their boats in apple-pie order—to use Leach’s homely
phrase.

His arm, by the way, has healed nicely, though the scar will remain all
his life.  Thomas Mugridge lives in mortal fear of him, and is afraid to
venture on deck after dark.  There are two or three standing quarrels in
the forecastle.  Louis tells me that the gossip of the sailors finds its
way aft, and that two of the telltales have been badly beaten by their
mates.  He shakes his head dubiously over the outlook for the man
Johnson, who is boat-puller in the same boat with him.  Johnson has been
guilty of speaking his mind too freely, and has collided two or three
times with Wolf Larsen over the pronunciation of his name.  Johansen he
thrashed on the amidships deck the other night, since which time the mate
has called him by his proper name.  But of course it is out of the
question that Johnson should thrash Wolf Larsen.

Louis has also given me additional information about Death Larsen, which
tallies with the captain’s brief description.  We may expect to meet
Death Larsen on the Japan coast.  “And look out for squalls,” is Louis’s
prophecy, “for they hate one another like the wolf whelps they are.”
Death Larsen is in command of the only sealing steamer in the fleet, the
_Macedonia_, which carries fourteen boats, whereas the rest of the
schooners carry only six.  There is wild talk of cannon aboard, and of
strange raids and expeditions she may make, ranging from opium smuggling
into the States and arms smuggling into China, to blackbirding and open
piracy.  Yet I cannot but believe for I have never yet caught him in a
lie, while he has a cyclopædic knowledge of sealing and the men of the
sealing fleets.

As it is forward and in the galley, so it is in the steerage and aft, on
this veritable hell-ship.  Men fight and struggle ferociously for one
another’s lives.  The hunters are looking for a shooting scrape at any
moment between Smoke and Henderson, whose old quarrel has not healed,
while Wolf Larsen says positively that he will kill the survivor of the
affair, if such affair comes off.  He frankly states that the position he
takes is based on no moral grounds, that all the hunters could kill and
eat one another so far as he is concerned, were it not that he needs them
alive for the hunting.  If they will only hold their hands until the
season is over, he promises them a royal carnival, when all grudges can
be settled and the survivors may toss the non-survivors overboard and
arrange a story as to how the missing men were lost at sea.  I think even
the hunters are appalled at his cold-bloodedness.  Wicked men though they
be, they are certainly very much afraid of him.

Thomas Mugridge is cur-like in his subjection to me, while I go about in
secret dread of him.  His is the courage of fear,—a strange thing I know
well of myself,—and at any moment it may master the fear and impel him to
the taking of my life.  My knee is much better, though it often aches for
long periods, and the stiffness is gradually leaving the arm which Wolf
Larsen squeezed.  Otherwise I am in splendid condition, feel that I am in
splendid condition.  My muscles are growing harder and increasing in
size.  My hands, however, are a spectacle for grief.  They have a
parboiled appearance, are afflicted with hang-nails, while the nails are
broken and discoloured, and the edges of the quick seem to be assuming a
fungoid sort of growth.  Also, I am suffering from boils, due to the
diet, most likely, for I was never afflicted in this manner before.

I was amused, a couple of evenings back, by seeing Wolf Larsen reading
the Bible, a copy of which, after the futile search for one at the
beginning of the voyage, had been found in the dead mate’s sea-chest.  I
wondered what Wolf Larsen could get from it, and he read aloud to me from
Ecclesiastes.  I could imagine he was speaking the thoughts of his own
mind as he read to me, and his voice, reverberating deeply and mournfully
in the confined cabin, charmed and held me.  He may be uneducated, but he
certainly knows how to express the significance of the written word.  I
can hear him now, as I shall always hear him, the primal melancholy
vibrant in his voice as he read:

    “I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of
    kings and of the provinces; I gat me men singers and women singers,
    and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that
    of all sorts.

    “So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in
    Jerusalem; also my wisdom returned with me.

    “Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought and on the
    labour that I had laboured to do; and behold, all was vanity and
    vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.

    “All things come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous
    and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean;
    to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not; as is the
    good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an
    oath.

    “This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that
    there is one event unto all; yea, also the heart of the sons of men
    is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and
    after that they go to the dead.

    “For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope; for a
    living dog is better than a dead lion.

    “For the living know that they shall die; but the dead know not
    anything, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them
    is forgotten.

    “Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished;
    neither have they any more a portion for ever in anything that is
    done under the sun.”

“There you have it, Hump,” he said, closing the book upon his finger and
looking up at me.  “The Preacher who was king over Israel in Jerusalem
thought as I think.  You call me a pessimist.  Is not this pessimism of
the blackest?—‘All is vanity and vexation of spirit,’ ‘There is no profit
under the sun,’ ‘There is one event unto all,’ to the fool and the wise,
the clean and the unclean, the sinner and the saint, and that event is
death, and an evil thing, he says.  For the Preacher loved life, and did
not want to die, saying, ‘For a living dog is better than a dead lion.’
He preferred the vanity and vexation to the silence and unmovableness of
the grave.  And so I.  To crawl is piggish; but to not crawl, to be as
the clod and rock, is loathsome to contemplate.  It is loathsome to the
life that is in me, the very essence of which is movement, the power of
movement, and the consciousness of the power of movement.  Life itself is
unsatisfaction, but to look ahead to death is greater unsatisfaction.”

“You are worse off than Omar,” I said.  “He, at least, after the
customary agonizing of youth, found content and made of his materialism a
joyous thing.”

“Who was Omar?” Wolf Larsen asked, and I did no more work that day, nor
the next, nor the next.

In his random reading he had never chanced upon the Rubáiyát, and it was
to him like a great find of treasure.  Much I remembered, possibly
two-thirds of the quatrains, and I managed to piece out the remainder
without difficulty.  We talked for hours over single stanzas, and I found
him reading into them a wail of regret and a rebellion which, for the
life of me, I could not discover myself.  Possibly I recited with a
certain joyous lilt which was my own, for—his memory was good, and at a
second rendering, very often the first, he made a quatrain his own—he
recited the same lines and invested them with an unrest and passionate
revolt that was well-nigh convincing.

I was interested as to which quatrain he would like best, and was not
surprised when he hit upon the one born of an instant’s irritability, and
quite at variance with the Persian’s complacent philosophy and genial
code of life:

   “What, without asking, hither hurried _Whence_?
   And, without asking, _Whither_ hurried hence!
      Oh, many a Cup of this forbidden Wine
   Must drown the memory of that insolence!”

“Great!” Wolf Larsen cried.  “Great!  That’s the keynote.  Insolence!  He
could not have used a better word.”

In vain I objected and denied.  He deluged me, overwhelmed me with
argument.

“It’s not the nature of life to be otherwise.  Life, when it knows that
it must cease living, will always rebel.  It cannot help itself.  The
Preacher found life and the works of life all a vanity and vexation, an
evil thing; but death, the ceasing to be able to be vain and vexed, he
found an eviler thing.  Through chapter after chapter he is worried by
the one event that cometh to all alike.  So Omar, so I, so you, even you,
for you rebelled against dying when Cooky sharpened a knife for you.  You
were afraid to die; the life that was in you, that composes you, that is
greater than you, did not want to die.  You have talked of the instinct
of immortality.  I talk of the instinct of life, which is to live, and
which, when death looms near and large, masters the instinct, so called,
of immortality.  It mastered it in you (you cannot deny it), because a
crazy Cockney cook sharpened a knife.

“You are afraid of him now.  You are afraid of me.  You cannot deny it.
If I should catch you by the throat, thus,”—his hand was about my throat
and my breath was shut off,—“and began to press the life out of you thus,
and thus, your instinct of immortality will go glimmering, and your
instinct of life, which is longing for life, will flutter up, and you
will struggle to save yourself.  Eh?  I see the fear of death in your
eyes.  You beat the air with your arms.  You exert all your puny strength
to struggle to live.  Your hand is clutching my arm, lightly it feels as
a butterfly resting there.  Your chest is heaving, your tongue
protruding, your skin turning dark, your eyes swimming.  ‘To live!  To
live!  To live!’ you are crying; and you are crying to live here and now,
not hereafter.  You doubt your immortality, eh?  Ha! ha!  You are not
sure of it.  You won’t chance it.  This life only you are certain is
real.  Ah, it is growing dark and darker.  It is the darkness of death,
the ceasing to be, the ceasing to feel, the ceasing to move, that is
gathering about you, descending upon you, rising around you.  Your eyes
are becoming set.  They are glazing.  My voice sounds faint and far.  You
cannot see my face.  And still you struggle in my grip.  You kick with
your legs.  Your body draws itself up in knots like a snake’s.  Your
chest heaves and strains.  To live!  To live!  To live—”

I heard no more.  Consciousness was blotted out by the darkness he had so
graphically described, and when I came to myself I was lying on the floor
and he was smoking a cigar and regarding me thoughtfully with that old
familiar light of curiosity in his eyes.

“Well, have I convinced you?” he demanded.  “Here take a drink of this.
I want to ask you some questions.”

I rolled my head negatively on the floor.  “Your arguments are
too—er—forcible,” I managed to articulate, at cost of great pain to my
aching throat.

“You’ll be all right in half-an-hour,” he assured me.  “And I promise I
won’t use any more physical demonstrations.  Get up now.  You can sit on
a chair.”

And, toy that I was of this monster, the discussion of Omar and the
Preacher was resumed.  And half the night we sat up over it.




CHAPTER XII


The last twenty-four hours have witnessed a carnival of brutality.  From
cabin to forecastle it seems to have broken out like a contagion.  I
scarcely know where to begin.  Wolf Larsen was really the cause of it.
The relations among the men, strained and made tense by feuds, quarrels
and grudges, were in a state of unstable equilibrium, and evil passions
flared up in flame like prairie-grass.

Thomas Mugridge is a sneak, a spy, an informer.  He has been attempting
to curry favour and reinstate himself in the good graces of the captain
by carrying tales of the men forward.  He it was, I know, that carried
some of Johnson’s hasty talk to Wolf Larsen.  Johnson, it seems, bought a
suit of oilskins from the slop-chest and found them to be of greatly
inferior quality.  Nor was he slow in advertising the fact.  The
slop-chest is a sort of miniature dry-goods store which is carried by all
sealing schooners and which is stocked with articles peculiar to the
needs of the sailors.  Whatever a sailor purchases is taken from his
subsequent earnings on the sealing grounds; for, as it is with the
hunters so it is with the boat-pullers and steerers—in the place of wages
they receive a “lay,” a rate of so much per skin for every skin captured
in their particular boat.

But of Johnson’s grumbling at the slop-chest I knew nothing, so that what
I witnessed came with a shock of sudden surprise.  I had just finished
sweeping the cabin, and had been inveigled by Wolf Larsen into a
discussion of Hamlet, his favourite Shakespearian character, when
Johansen descended the companion stairs followed by Johnson.  The
latter’s cap came off after the custom of the sea, and he stood
respectfully in the centre of the cabin, swaying heavily and uneasily to
the roll of the schooner and facing the captain.

“Shut the doors and draw the slide,” Wolf Larsen said to me.

As I obeyed I noticed an anxious light come into Johnson’s eyes, but I
did not dream of its cause.  I did not dream of what was to occur until
it did occur, but he knew from the very first what was coming and awaited
it bravely.  And in his action I found complete refutation of all Wolf
Larsen’s materialism.  The sailor Johnson was swayed by idea, by
principle, and truth, and sincerity.  He was right, he knew he was right,
and he was unafraid.  He would die for the right if needs be, he would be
true to himself, sincere with his soul.  And in this was portrayed the
victory of the spirit over the flesh, the indomitability and moral
grandeur of the soul that knows no restriction and rises above time and
space and matter with a surety and invincibleness born of nothing else
than eternity and immortality.

But to return.  I noticed the anxious light in Johnson’s eyes, but
mistook it for the native shyness and embarrassment of the man.  The
mate, Johansen, stood away several feet to the side of him, and fully
three yards in front of him sat Wolf Larsen on one of the pivotal cabin
chairs.  An appreciable pause fell after I had closed the doors and drawn
the slide, a pause that must have lasted fully a minute.  It was broken
by Wolf Larsen.

“Yonson,” he began.

“My name is Johnson, sir,” the sailor boldly corrected.

“Well, Johnson, then, damn you!  Can you guess why I have sent for you?”

“Yes, and no, sir,” was the slow reply.  “My work is done well.  The mate
knows that, and you know it, sir.  So there cannot be any complaint.”

“And is that all?” Wolf Larsen queried, his voice soft, and low, and
purring.

“I know you have it in for me,” Johnson continued with his unalterable
and ponderous slowness.  “You do not like me.  You—you—”

“Go on,” Wolf Larsen prompted.  “Don’t be afraid of my feelings.”

“I am not afraid,” the sailor retorted, a slight angry flush rising
through his sunburn.  “If I speak not fast, it is because I have not been
from the old country as long as you.  You do not like me because I am too
much of a man; that is why, sir.”

“You are too much of a man for ship discipline, if that is what you mean,
and if you know what I mean,” was Wolf Larsen’s retort.

“I know English, and I know what you mean, sir,” Johnson answered, his
flush deepening at the slur on his knowledge of the English language.

“Johnson,” Wolf Larsen said, with an air of dismissing all that had gone
before as introductory to the main business in hand, “I understand you’re
not quite satisfied with those oilskins?”

“No, I am not.  They are no good, sir.”

“And you’ve been shooting off your mouth about them.”

“I say what I think, sir,” the sailor answered courageously, not failing
at the same time in ship courtesy, which demanded that “sir” be appended
to each speech he made.

It was at this moment that I chanced to glance at Johansen.  His big
fists were clenching and unclenching, and his face was positively
fiendish, so malignantly did he look at Johnson.  I noticed a black
discoloration, still faintly visible, under Johansen’s eye, a mark of the
thrashing he had received a few nights before from the sailor.  For the
first time I began to divine that something terrible was about to be
enacted,—what, I could not imagine.

“Do you know what happens to men who say what you’ve said about my
slop-chest and me?” Wolf Larsen was demanding.

“I know, sir,” was the answer.

“What?” Wolf Larsen demanded, sharply and imperatively.

“What you and the mate there are going to do to me, sir.”

“Look at him, Hump,” Wolf Larsen said to me, “look at this bit of
animated dust, this aggregation of matter that moves and breathes and
defies me and thoroughly believes itself to be compounded of something
good; that is impressed with certain human fictions such as righteousness
and honesty, and that will live up to them in spite of all personal
discomforts and menaces.  What do you think of him, Hump?  What do you
think of him?”

“I think that he is a better man than you are,” I answered, impelled,
somehow, with a desire to draw upon myself a portion of the wrath I felt
was about to break upon his head.  “His human fictions, as you choose to
call them, make for nobility and manhood.  You have no fictions, no
dreams, no ideals.  You are a pauper.”

He nodded his head with a savage pleasantness.  “Quite true, Hump, quite
true.  I have no fictions that make for nobility and manhood.  A living
dog is better than a dead lion, say I with the Preacher.  My only
doctrine is the doctrine of expediency, and it makes for surviving.  This
bit of the ferment we call ‘Johnson,’ when he is no longer a bit of the
ferment, only dust and ashes, will have no more nobility than any dust
and ashes, while I shall still be alive and roaring.”

“Do you know what I am going to do?” he questioned.

I shook my head.

“Well, I am going to exercise my prerogative of roaring and show you how
fares nobility.  Watch me.”

Three yards away from Johnson he was, and sitting down.  Nine feet!  And
yet he left the chair in full leap, without first gaining a standing
position.  He left the chair, just as he sat in it, squarely, springing
from the sitting posture like a wild animal, a tiger, and like a tiger
covered the intervening space.  It was an avalanche of fury that Johnson
strove vainly to fend off.  He threw one arm down to protect the stomach,
the other arm up to protect the head; but Wolf Larsen’s fist drove midway
between, on the chest, with a crushing, resounding impact.  Johnson’s
breath, suddenly expelled, shot from his mouth and as suddenly checked,
with the forced, audible expiration of a man wielding an axe.  He almost
fell backward, and swayed from side to side in an effort to recover his
balance.

I cannot give the further particulars of the horrible scene that
followed.  It was too revolting.  It turns me sick even now when I think
of it.  Johnson fought bravely enough, but he was no match for Wolf
Larsen, much less for Wolf Larsen and the mate.  It was frightful.  I had
not imagined a human being could endure so much and still live and
struggle on.  And struggle on Johnson did.  Of course there was no hope
for him, not the slightest, and he knew it as well as I, but by the
manhood that was in him he could not cease from fighting for that
manhood.

It was too much for me to witness.  I felt that I should lose my mind,
and I ran up the companion stairs to open the doors and escape on deck.
But Wolf Larsen, leaving his victim for the moment, and with one of his
tremendous springs, gained my side and flung me into the far corner of
the cabin.

“The phenomena of life, Hump,” he girded at me.  “Stay and watch it.  You
may gather data on the immortality of the soul.  Besides, you know, we
can’t hurt Johnson’s soul.  It’s only the fleeting form we may demolish.”

It seemed centuries—possibly it was no more than ten minutes that the
beating continued.  Wolf Larsen and Johansen were all about the poor
fellow.  They struck him with their fists, kicked him with their heavy
shoes, knocked him down, and dragged him to his feet to knock him down
again.  His eyes were blinded so that he could not see, and the blood
running from ears and nose and mouth turned the cabin into a shambles.
And when he could no longer rise they still continued to beat and kick
him where he lay.

“Easy, Johansen; easy as she goes,” Wolf Larsen finally said.

But the beast in the mate was up and rampant, and Wolf Larsen was
compelled to brush him away with a back-handed sweep of the arm, gentle
enough, apparently, but which hurled Johansen back like a cork, driving
his head against the wall with a crash.  He fell to the floor, half
stunned for the moment, breathing heavily and blinking his eyes in a
stupid sort of way.

“Jerk open the doors, Hump,” I was commanded.

I obeyed, and the two brutes picked up the senseless man like a sack of
rubbish and hove him clear up the companion stairs, through the narrow
doorway, and out on deck.  The blood from his nose gushed in a scarlet
stream over the feet of the helmsman, who was none other than Louis, his
boat-mate.  But Louis took and gave a spoke and gazed imperturbably into
the binnacle.

Not so was the conduct of George Leach, the erstwhile cabin-boy.  Fore
and aft there was nothing that could have surprised us more than his
consequent behaviour.  He it was that came up on the poop without orders
and dragged Johnson forward, where he set about dressing his wounds as
well as he could and making him comfortable.  Johnson, as Johnson, was
unrecognizable; and not only that, for his features, as human features at
all, were unrecognizable, so discoloured and swollen had they become in
the few minutes which had elapsed between the beginning of the beating
and the dragging forward of the body.

But of Leach’s behaviour—By the time I had finished cleansing the cabin
he had taken care of Johnson.  I had come up on deck for a breath of
fresh air and to try to get some repose for my overwrought nerves.  Wolf
Larsen was smoking a cigar and examining the patent log which the _Ghost_
usually towed astern, but which had been hauled in for some purpose.
Suddenly Leach’s voice came to my ears.  It was tense and hoarse with an
overmastering rage.  I turned and saw him standing just beneath the break
of the poop on the port side of the galley.  His face was convulsed and
white, his eyes were flashing, his clenched fists raised overhead.

“May God damn your soul to hell, Wolf Larsen, only hell’s too good for
you, you coward, you murderer, you pig!” was his opening salutation.

I was thunderstruck.  I looked for his instant annihilation.  But it was
not Wolf Larsen’s whim to annihilate him.  He sauntered slowly forward to
the break of the poop, and, leaning his elbow on the corner of the cabin,
gazed down thoughtfully and curiously at the excited boy.

And the boy indicted Wolf Larsen as he had never been indicted before.
The sailors assembled in a fearful group just outside the forecastle
scuttle and watched and listened.  The hunters piled pell-mell out of the
steerage, but as Leach’s tirade continued I saw that there was no levity
in their faces.  Even they were frightened, not at the boy’s terrible
words, but at his terrible audacity.  It did not seem possible that any
living creature could thus beard Wolf Larsen in his teeth.  I know for
myself that I was shocked into admiration of the boy, and I saw in him
the splendid invincibleness of immortality rising above the flesh and the
fears of the flesh, as in the prophets of old, to condemn
unrighteousness.

And such condemnation!  He haled forth Wolf Larsen’s soul naked to the
scorn of men.  He rained upon it curses from God and High Heaven, and
withered it with a heat of invective that savoured of a mediæval
excommunication of the Catholic Church.  He ran the gamut of
denunciation, rising to heights of wrath that were sublime and almost
Godlike, and from sheer exhaustion sinking to the vilest and most
indecent abuse.

His rage was a madness.  His lips were flecked with a soapy froth, and
sometimes he choked and gurgled and became inarticulate.  And through it
all, calm and impassive, leaning on his elbow and gazing down, Wolf
Larsen seemed lost in a great curiosity.  This wild stirring of yeasty
life, this terrific revolt and defiance of matter that moved, perplexed
and interested him.

Each moment I looked, and everybody looked, for him to leap upon the boy
and destroy him.  But it was not his whim.  His cigar went out, and he
continued to gaze silently and curiously.

Leach had worked himself into an ecstasy of impotent rage.

“Pig!  Pig!  Pig!” he was reiterating at the top of his lungs.  “Why
don’t you come down and kill me, you murderer?  You can do it!  I ain’t
afraid!  There’s no one to stop you!  Damn sight better dead and outa
your reach than alive and in your clutches!  Come on, you coward!  Kill
me!  Kill me!  Kill me!”

It was at this stage that Thomas Mugridge’s erratic soul brought him into
the scene.  He had been listening at the galley door, but he now came
out, ostensibly to fling some scraps over the side, but obviously to see
the killing he was certain would take place.  He smirked greasily up into
the face of Wolf Larsen, who seemed not to see him.  But the Cockney was
unabashed, though mad, stark mad.  He turned to Leach, saying:

“Such langwidge!  Shockin’!”

Leach’s rage was no longer impotent.  Here at last was something ready to
hand.  And for the first time since the stabbing the Cockney had appeared
outside the galley without his knife.  The words had barely left his
mouth when he was knocked down by Leach.  Three times he struggled to his
feet, striving to gain the galley, and each time was knocked down.

“Oh, Lord!” he cried.  “’Elp!  ’Elp!  Tyke ’im aw’y, carn’t yer?  Tyke
’im aw’y!”

The hunters laughed from sheer relief.  Tragedy had dwindled, the farce
had begun.  The sailors now crowded boldly aft, grinning and shuffling,
to watch the pummelling of the hated Cockney.  And even I felt a great
joy surge up within me.  I confess that I delighted in this beating Leach
was giving to Thomas Mugridge, though it was as terrible, almost, as the
one Mugridge had caused to be given to Johnson.  But the expression of
Wolf Larsen’s face never changed.  He did not change his position either,
but continued to gaze down with a great curiosity.  For all his pragmatic
certitude, it seemed as if he watched the play and movement of life in
the hope of discovering something more about it, of discerning in its
maddest writhings a something which had hitherto escaped him,—the key to
its mystery, as it were, which would make all clear and plain.

But the beating!  It was quite similar to the one I had witnessed in the
cabin.  The Cockney strove in vain to protect himself from the infuriated
boy.  And in vain he strove to gain the shelter of the cabin.  He rolled
toward it, grovelled toward it, fell toward it when he was knocked down.
But blow followed blow with bewildering rapidity.  He was knocked about
like a shuttlecock, until, finally, like Johnson, he was beaten and
kicked as he lay helpless on the deck.  And no one interfered.  Leach
could have killed him, but, having evidently filled the measure of his
vengeance, he drew away from his prostrate foe, who was whimpering and
wailing in a puppyish sort of way, and walked forward.

But these two affairs were only the opening events of the day’s
programme.  In the afternoon Smoke and Henderson fell foul of each other,
and a fusillade of shots came up from the steerage, followed by a
stampede of the other four hunters for the deck.  A column of thick,
acrid smoke—the kind always made by black powder—was arising through the
open companion-way, and down through it leaped Wolf Larsen.  The sound of
blows and scuffling came to our ears.  Both men were wounded, and he was
thrashing them both for having disobeyed his orders and crippled
themselves in advance of the hunting season.  In fact, they were badly
wounded, and, having thrashed them, he proceeded to operate upon them in
a rough surgical fashion and to dress their wounds.  I served as
assistant while he probed and cleansed the passages made by the bullets,
and I saw the two men endure his crude surgery without anæsthetics and
with no more to uphold them than a stiff tumbler of whisky.

Then, in the first dog-watch, trouble came to a head in the forecastle.
It took its rise out of the tittle-tattle and tale-bearing which had been
the cause of Johnson’s beating, and from the noise we heard, and from the
sight of the bruised men next day, it was patent that half the forecastle
had soundly drubbed the other half.

The second dog-watch and the day were wound up by a fight between
Johansen and the lean, Yankee-looking hunter, Latimer.  It was caused by
remarks of Latimer’s concerning the noises made by the mate in his sleep,
and though Johansen was whipped, he kept the steerage awake for the rest
of the night while he blissfully slumbered and fought the fight over and
over again.

As for myself, I was oppressed with nightmare.  The day had been like
some horrible dream.  Brutality had followed brutality, and flaming
passions and cold-blooded cruelty had driven men to seek one another’s
lives, and to strive to hurt, and maim, and destroy.  My nerves were
shocked.  My mind itself was shocked.  All my days had been passed in
comparative ignorance of the animality of man.  In fact, I had known life
only in its intellectual phases.  Brutality I had experienced, but it was
the brutality of the intellect—the cutting sarcasm of Charley Furuseth,
the cruel epigrams and occasional harsh witticisms of the fellows at the
Bibelot, and the nasty remarks of some of the professors during my
undergraduate days.

That was all.  But that men should wreak their anger on others by the
bruising of the flesh and the letting of blood was something strangely
and fearfully new to me.  Not for nothing had I been called “Sissy” Van
Weyden, I thought, as I tossed restlessly on my bunk between one
nightmare and another.  And it seemed to me that my innocence of the
realities of life had been complete indeed.  I laughed bitterly to
myself, and seemed to find in Wolf Larsen’s forbidding philosophy a more
adequate explanation of life than I found in my own.

And I was frightened when I became conscious of the trend of my thought.
The continual brutality around me was degenerative in its effect.  It bid
fair to destroy for me all that was best and brightest in life.  My
reason dictated that the beating Thomas Mugridge had received was an ill
thing, and yet for the life of me I could not prevent my soul joying in
it.  And even while I was oppressed by the enormity of my sin,—for sin it
was,—I chuckled with an insane delight.  I was no longer Humphrey Van
Weyden.  I was Hump, cabin-boy on the schooner _Ghost_.  Wolf Larsen was
my captain, Thomas Mugridge and the rest were my companions, and I was
receiving repeated impresses from the die which had stamped them all.




CHAPTER XIII


For three days I did my own work and Thomas Mugridge’s too; and I flatter
myself that I did his work well.  I know that it won Wolf Larsen’s
approval, while the sailors beamed with satisfaction during the brief
time my _régime_ lasted.

“The first clean bite since I come aboard,” Harrison said to me at the
galley door, as he returned the dinner pots and pans from the forecastle.
“Somehow Tommy’s grub always tastes of grease, stale grease, and I reckon
he ain’t changed his shirt since he left ’Frisco.”

“I know he hasn’t,” I answered.

“And I’ll bet he sleeps in it,” Harrison added.

“And you won’t lose,” I agreed.  “The same shirt, and he hasn’t had it
off once in all this time.”

But three days was all Wolf Larsen allowed him in which to recover from
the effects of the beating.  On the fourth day, lame and sore, scarcely
able to see, so closed were his eyes, he was haled from his bunk by the
nape of the neck and set to his duty.  He sniffled and wept, but Wolf
Larsen was pitiless.

“And see that you serve no more slops,” was his parting injunction.  “No
more grease and dirt, mind, and a clean shirt occasionally, or you’ll get
a tow over the side.  Understand?”

Thomas Mugridge crawled weakly across the galley floor, and a short lurch
of the _Ghost_ sent him staggering.  In attempting to recover himself, he
reached for the iron railing which surrounded the stove and kept the pots
from sliding off; but he missed the railing, and his hand, with his
weight behind it, landed squarely on the hot surface.  There was a sizzle
and odour of burning flesh, and a sharp cry of pain.

“Oh, Gawd, Gawd, wot ’ave I done?” he wailed; sitting down in the
coal-box and nursing his new hurt by rocking back and forth.  “W’y ’as
all this come on me?  It mykes me fair sick, it does, an’ I try so ’ard
to go through life ’armless an’ ’urtin’ nobody.”

The tears were running down his puffed and discoloured cheeks, and his
face was drawn with pain.  A savage expression flitted across it.

“Oh, ’ow I ’ate ’im!  ’Ow I ’ate ’im!” he gritted out.

“Whom?” I asked; but the poor wretch was weeping again over his
misfortunes.  Less difficult it was to guess whom he hated than whom he
did not hate.  For I had come to see a malignant devil in him which
impelled him to hate all the world.  I sometimes thought that he hated
even himself, so grotesquely had life dealt with him, and so monstrously.
At such moments a great sympathy welled up within me, and I felt shame
that I had ever joyed in his discomfiture or pain.  Life had been unfair
to him.  It had played him a scurvy trick when it fashioned him into the
thing he was, and it had played him scurvy tricks ever since.  What
chance had he to be anything else than he was?  And as though answering
my unspoken thought, he wailed:

“I never ’ad no chance, not ’arf a chance!  ’Oo was there to send me to
school, or put tommy in my ’ungry belly, or wipe my bloody nose for me,
w’en I was a kiddy?  ’Oo ever did anything for me, heh?  ’Oo, I s’y?”

“Never mind, Tommy,” I said, placing a soothing hand on his shoulder.
“Cheer up.  It’ll all come right in the end.  You’ve long years before
you, and you can make anything you please of yourself.”

“It’s a lie! a bloody lie!” he shouted in my face, flinging off the hand.
“It’s a lie, and you know it.  I’m already myde, an’ myde out of leavin’s
an’ scraps.  It’s all right for you, ’Ump.  You was born a gentleman.
You never knew wot it was to go ’ungry, to cry yerself asleep with yer
little belly gnawin’ an’ gnawin’, like a rat inside yer.  It carn’t come
right.  If I was President of the United Stytes to-morrer, ’ow would it
fill my belly for one time w’en I was a kiddy and it went empty?

“’Ow could it, I s’y?  I was born to sufferin’ and sorrer.  I’ve had more
cruel sufferin’ than any ten men, I ’ave.  I’ve been in orspital arf my
bleedin’ life.  I’ve ’ad the fever in Aspinwall, in ’Avana, in New
Orleans.  I near died of the scurvy and was rotten with it six months in
Barbadoes.  Smallpox in ’Onolulu, two broken legs in Shanghai, pnuemonia
in Unalaska, three busted ribs an’ my insides all twisted in ’Frisco.
An’ ’ere I am now.  Look at me!  Look at me!  My ribs kicked loose from
my back again.  I’ll be coughin’ blood before eyght bells.  ’Ow can it be
myde up to me, I arsk?  ’Oo’s goin’ to do it?  Gawd?  ’Ow Gawd must ’ave
’ated me w’en ’e signed me on for a voyage in this bloomin’ world of
’is!”

This tirade against destiny went on for an hour or more, and then he
buckled to his work, limping and groaning, and in his eyes a great hatred
for all created things.  His diagnosis was correct, however, for he was
seized with occasional sicknesses, during which he vomited blood and
suffered great pain.  And as he said, it seemed God hated him too much to
let him die, for he ultimately grew better and waxed more malignant than
ever.

Several days more passed before Johnson crawled on deck and went about
his work in a half-hearted way.  He was still a sick man, and I more than
once observed him creeping painfully aloft to a topsail, or drooping
wearily as he stood at the wheel.  But, still worse, it seemed that his
spirit was broken.  He was abject before Wolf Larsen and almost grovelled
to Johansen.  Not so was the conduct of Leach.  He went about the deck
like a tiger cub, glaring his hatred openly at Wolf Larsen and Johansen.

“I’ll do for you yet, you slab-footed Swede,” I heard him say to Johansen
one night on deck.

The mate cursed him in the darkness, and the next moment some missile
struck the galley a sharp rap.  There was more cursing, and a mocking
laugh, and when all was quiet I stole outside and found a heavy knife
imbedded over an inch in the solid wood.  A few minutes later the mate
came fumbling about in search of it, but I returned it privily to Leach
next day.  He grinned when I handed it over, yet it was a grin that
contained more sincere thanks than a multitude of the verbosities of
speech common to the members of my own class.

Unlike any one else in the ship’s company, I now found myself with no
quarrels on my hands and in the good graces of all.  The hunters possibly
no more than tolerated me, though none of them disliked me; while Smoke
and Henderson, convalescent under a deck awning and swinging day and
night in their hammocks, assured me that I was better than any hospital
nurse, and that they would not forget me at the end of the voyage when
they were paid off.  (As though I stood in need of their money!  I, who
could have bought them out, bag and baggage, and the schooner and its
equipment, a score of times over!)  But upon me had devolved the task of
tending their wounds, and pulling them through, and I did my best by
them.

Wolf Larsen underwent another bad attack of headache which lasted two
days.  He must have suffered severely, for he called me in and obeyed my
commands like a sick child.  But nothing I could do seemed to relieve
him.  At my suggestion, however, he gave up smoking and drinking; though
why such a magnificent animal as he should have headaches at all puzzles
me.

“’Tis the hand of God, I’m tellin’ you,” is the way Louis sees it.  “’Tis
a visitation for his black-hearted deeds, and there’s more behind and
comin’, or else—”

“Or else,” I prompted.

“God is noddin’ and not doin’ his duty, though it’s me as shouldn’t say
it.”

I was mistaken when I said that I was in the good graces of all.  Not
only does Thomas Mugridge continue to hate me, but he has discovered a
new reason for hating me.  It took me no little while to puzzle it out,
but I finally discovered that it was because I was more luckily born than
he—“gentleman born,” he put it.

“And still no more dead men,” I twitted Louis, when Smoke and Henderson,
side by side, in friendly conversation, took their first exercise on
deck.

Louis surveyed me with his shrewd grey eyes, and shook his head
portentously.  “She’s a-comin’, I tell you, and it’ll be sheets and
halyards, stand by all hands, when she begins to howl.  I’ve had the feel
iv it this long time, and I can feel it now as plainly as I feel the
rigging iv a dark night.  She’s close, she’s close.”

“Who goes first?” I queried.

“Not fat old Louis, I promise you,” he laughed.  “For ’tis in the bones
iv me I know that come this time next year I’ll be gazin’ in the old
mother’s eyes, weary with watchin’ iv the sea for the five sons she gave
to it.”

“Wot’s ’e been s’yin’ to yer?” Thomas Mugridge demanded a moment later.

“That he’s going home some day to see his mother,” I answered
diplomatically.

“I never ’ad none,” was the Cockney’s comment, as he gazed with
lustreless, hopeless eyes into mine.




CHAPTER XIV


It has dawned upon me that I have never placed a proper valuation upon
womankind.  For that matter, though not amative to any considerable
degree so far as I have discovered, I was never outside the atmosphere of
women until now.  My mother and sisters were always about me, and I was
always trying to escape them; for they worried me to distraction with
their solicitude for my health and with their periodic inroads on my den,
when my orderly confusion, upon which I prided myself, was turned into
worse confusion and less order, though it looked neat enough to the eye.
I never could find anything when they had departed.  But now, alas, how
welcome would have been the feel of their presence, the frou-frou and
swish-swish of their skirts which I had so cordially detested!  I am
sure, if I ever get home, that I shall never be irritable with them
again.  They may dose me and doctor me morning, noon, and night, and dust
and sweep and put my den to rights every minute of the day, and I shall
only lean back and survey it all and be thankful in that I am possessed
of a mother and some several sisters.

All of which has set me wondering.  Where are the mothers of these twenty
and odd men on the _Ghost_?  It strikes me as unnatural and unhealthful
that men should be totally separated from women and herd through the
world by themselves.  Coarseness and savagery are the inevitable results.
These men about me should have wives, and sisters, and daughters; then
would they be capable of softness, and tenderness, and sympathy.  As it
is, not one of them is married.  In years and years not one of them has
been in contact with a good woman, or within the influence, or
redemption, which irresistibly radiates from such a creature.  There is
no balance in their lives.  Their masculinity, which in itself is of the
brute, has been over-developed.  The other and spiritual side of their
natures has been dwarfed—atrophied, in fact.

They are a company of celibates, grinding harshly against one another and
growing daily more calloused from the grinding.  It seems to me
impossible sometimes that they ever had mothers.  It would appear that
they are a half-brute, half-human species, a race apart, wherein there is
no such thing as sex; that they are hatched out by the sun like turtle
eggs, or receive life in some similar and sordid fashion; and that all
their days they fester in brutality and viciousness, and in the end die
as unlovely as they have lived.

Rendered curious by this new direction of ideas, I talked with Johansen
last night—the first superfluous words with which he has favoured me
since the voyage began.  He left Sweden when he was eighteen, is now
thirty-eight, and in all the intervening time has not been home once.  He
had met a townsman, a couple of years before, in some sailor
boarding-house in Chile, so that he knew his mother to be still alive.

“She must be a pretty old woman now,” he said, staring meditatively into
the binnacle and then jerking a sharp glance at Harrison, who was
steering a point off the course.

“When did you last write to her?”

He performed his mental arithmetic aloud.  “Eighty-one; no—eighty-two,
eh? no—eighty-three?  Yes, eighty-three.  Ten years ago.  From some
little port in Madagascar.  I was trading.

“You see,” he went on, as though addressing his neglected mother across
half the girth of the earth, “each year I was going home.  So what was
the good to write?  It was only a year.  And each year something
happened, and I did not go.  But I am mate, now, and when I pay off at
’Frisco, maybe with five hundred dollars, I will ship myself on a
windjammer round the Horn to Liverpool, which will give me more money;
and then I will pay my passage from there home.  Then she will not do any
more work.”

“But does she work? now?  How old is she?”

“About seventy,” he answered.  And then, boastingly, “We work from the
time we are born until we die, in my country.  That’s why we live so
long.  I will live to a hundred.”

I shall never forget this conversation.  The words were the last I ever
heard him utter.  Perhaps they were the last he did utter, too.  For,
going down into the cabin to turn in, I decided that it was too stuffy to
sleep below.  It was a calm night.  We were out of the Trades, and the
_Ghost_ was forging ahead barely a knot an hour.  So I tucked a blanket
and pillow under my arm and went up on deck.

As I passed between Harrison and the binnacle, which was built into the
top of the cabin, I noticed that he was this time fully three points off.
Thinking that he was asleep, and wishing him to escape reprimand or
worse, I spoke to him.  But he was not asleep.  His eyes were wide and
staring.  He seemed greatly perturbed, unable to reply to me.

“What’s the matter?” I asked.  “Are you sick?”

He shook his head, and with a deep sign as of awakening, caught his
breath.

“You’d better get on your course, then,” I chided.

He put a few spokes over, and I watched the compass-card swing slowly to
N.N.W. and steady itself with slight oscillations.

I took a fresh hold on my bedclothes and was preparing to start on, when
some movement caught my eye and I looked astern to the rail.  A sinewy
hand, dripping with water, was clutching the rail.  A second hand took
form in the darkness beside it.  I watched, fascinated.  What visitant
from the gloom of the deep was I to behold?  Whatever it was, I knew that
it was climbing aboard by the log-line.  I saw a head, the hair wet and
straight, shape itself, and then the unmistakable eyes and face of Wolf
Larsen.  His right cheek was red with blood, which flowed from some wound
in the head.

He drew himself inboard with a quick effort, and arose to his feet,
glancing swiftly, as he did so, at the man at the wheel, as though to
assure himself of his identity and that there was nothing to fear from
him.  The sea-water was streaming from him.  It made little audible
gurgles which distracted me.  As he stepped toward me I shrank back
instinctively, for I saw that in his eyes which spelled death.

“All right, Hump,” he said in a low voice.  “Where’s the mate?”

I shook my head.

“Johansen!” he called softly.  “Johansen!”

“Where is he?” he demanded of Harrison.

The young fellow seemed to have recovered his composure, for he answered
steadily enough, “I don’t know, sir.  I saw him go for’ard a little while
ago.”

“So did I go for’ard.  But you will observe that I didn’t come back the
way I went.  Can you explain it?”

“You must have been overboard, sir.”

“Shall I look for him in the steerage, sir?” I asked.

Wolf Larsen shook his head.  “You wouldn’t find him, Hump.  But you’ll
do.  Come on.  Never mind your bedding.  Leave it where it is.”

I followed at his heels.  There was nothing stirring amidships.

“Those cursed hunters,” was his comment.  “Too damned fat and lazy to
stand a four-hour watch.”

But on the forecastle-head we found three sailors asleep.  He turned them
over and looked at their faces.  They composed the watch on deck, and it
was the ship’s custom, in good weather, to let the watch sleep with the
exception of the officer, the helmsman, and the look-out.

“Who’s look-out?” he demanded.

“Me, sir,” answered Holyoak, one of the deep-water sailors, a slight
tremor in his voice.  “I winked off just this very minute, sir.  I’m
sorry, sir.  It won’t happen again.”

“Did you hear or see anything on deck?”

“No, sir, I—”

But Wolf Larsen had turned away with a snort of disgust, leaving the
sailor rubbing his eyes with surprise at having been let off so easily.

“Softly, now,” Wolf Larsen warned me in a whisper, as he doubled his body
into the forecastle scuttle and prepared to descend.

I followed with a quaking heart.  What was to happen I knew no more than
did I know what had happened.  But blood had been shed, and it was
through no whim of Wolf Larsen that he had gone over the side with his
scalp laid open.  Besides, Johansen was missing.

It was my first descent into the forecastle, and I shall not soon forget
my impression of it, caught as I stood on my feet at the bottom of the
ladder.  Built directly in the eyes of the schooner, it was of the shape
of a triangle, along the three sides of which stood the bunks, in
double-tier, twelve of them.  It was no larger than a hall bedroom in
Grub Street, and yet twelve men were herded into it to eat and sleep and
carry on all the functions of living.  My bedroom at home was not large,
yet it could have contained a dozen similar forecastles, and taking into
consideration the height of the ceiling, a score at least.

It smelled sour and musty, and by the dim light of the swinging sea-lamp
I saw every bit of available wall-space hung deep with sea-boots,
oilskins, and garments, clean and dirty, of various sorts.  These swung
back and forth with every roll of the vessel, giving rise to a brushing
sound, as of trees against a roof or wall.  Somewhere a boot thumped
loudly and at irregular intervals against the wall; and, though it was a
mild night on the sea, there was a continual chorus of the creaking
timbers and bulkheads and of abysmal noises beneath the flooring.

The sleepers did not mind.  There were eight of them,—the two watches
below,—and the air was thick with the warmth and odour of their
breathing, and the ear was filled with the noise of their snoring and of
their sighs and half-groans, tokens plain of the rest of the animal-man.
But were they sleeping? all of them?  Or had they been sleeping?  This
was evidently Wolf Larsen’s quest—to find the men who appeared to be
asleep and who were not asleep or who had not been asleep very recently.
And he went about it in a way that reminded me of a story out of
Boccaccio.

He took the sea-lamp from its swinging frame and handed it to me.  He
began at the first bunks forward on the star-board side.  In the top one
lay Oofty-Oofty, a Kanaka and splendid seaman, so named by his mates.  He
was asleep on his back and breathing as placidly as a woman.  One arm was
under his head, the other lay on top of the blankets.  Wolf Larsen put
thumb and forefinger to the wrist and counted the pulse.  In the midst of
it the Kanaka roused.  He awoke as gently as he slept.  There was no
movement of the body whatever.  The eyes, only, moved.  They flashed wide
open, big and black, and stared, unblinking, into our faces.  Wolf Larsen
put his finger to his lips as a sign for silence, and the eyes closed
again.

In the lower bunk lay Louis, grossly fat and warm and sweaty, asleep
unfeignedly and sleeping laboriously.  While Wolf Larsen held his wrist
he stirred uneasily, bowing his body so that for a moment it rested on
shoulders and heels.  His lips moved, and he gave voice to this enigmatic
utterance:

“A shilling’s worth a quarter; but keep your lamps out for
thruppenny-bits, or the publicans ’ll shove ’em on you for sixpence.”

Then he rolled over on his side with a heavy, sobbing sigh, saying:

“A sixpence is a tanner, and a shilling a bob; but what a pony is I don’t
know.”

Satisfied with the honesty of his and the Kanaka’s sleep, Wolf Larsen
passed on to the next two bunks on the starboard side, occupied top and
bottom, as we saw in the light of the sea-lamp, by Leach and Johnson.

As Wolf Larsen bent down to the lower bunk to take Johnson’s pulse, I,
standing erect and holding the lamp, saw Leach’s head rise stealthily as
he peered over the side of his bunk to see what was going on.  He must
have divined Wolf Larsen’s trick and the sureness of detection, for the
light was at once dashed from my hand and the forecastle was left in
darkness.  He must have leaped, also, at the same instant, straight down
on Wolf Larsen.

The first sounds were those of a conflict between a bull and a wolf.  I
heard a great infuriated bellow go up from Wolf Larsen, and from Leach a
snarling that was desperate and blood-curdling.  Johnson must have joined
him immediately, so that his abject and grovelling conduct on deck for
the past few days had been no more than planned deception.

I was so terror-stricken by this fight in the dark that I leaned against
the ladder, trembling and unable to ascend.  And upon me was that old
sickness at the pit of the stomach, caused always by the spectacle of
physical violence.  In this instance I could not see, but I could hear
the impact of the blows—the soft crushing sound made by flesh striking
forcibly against flesh.  Then there was the crashing about of the
entwined bodies, the laboured breathing, the short quick gasps of sudden
pain.

There must have been more men in the conspiracy to murder the captain and
mate, for by the sounds I knew that Leach and Johnson had been quickly
reinforced by some of their mates.

“Get a knife somebody!” Leach was shouting.

“Pound him on the head!  Mash his brains out!” was Johnson’s cry.

But after his first bellow, Wolf Larsen made no noise.  He was fighting
grimly and silently for life.  He was sore beset.  Down at the very
first, he had been unable to gain his feet, and for all of his tremendous
strength I felt that there was no hope for him.

The force with which they struggled was vividly impressed on me; for I
was knocked down by their surging bodies and badly bruised.  But in the
confusion I managed to crawl into an empty lower bunk out of the way.

“All hands!  We’ve got him!  We’ve got him!” I could hear Leach crying.

“Who?” demanded those who had been really asleep, and who had wakened to
they knew not what.

“It’s the bloody mate!” was Leach’s crafty answer, strained from him in a
smothered sort of way.

This was greeted with whoops of joy, and from then on Wolf Larsen had
seven strong men on top of him, Louis, I believe, taking no part in it.
The forecastle was like an angry hive of bees aroused by some marauder.

“What ho! below there!” I heard Latimer shout down the scuttle, too
cautious to descend into the inferno of passion he could hear raging
beneath him in the darkness.

“Won’t somebody get a knife?  Oh, won’t somebody get a knife?” Leach
pleaded in the first interval of comparative silence.

The number of the assailants was a cause of confusion.  They blocked
their own efforts, while Wolf Larsen, with but a single purpose, achieved
his.  This was to fight his way across the floor to the ladder.  Though
in total darkness, I followed his progress by its sound.  No man less
than a giant could have done what he did, once he had gained the foot of
the ladder.  Step by step, by the might of his arms, the whole pack of
men striving to drag him back and down, he drew his body up from the
floor till he stood erect.  And then, step by step, hand and foot, he
slowly struggled up the ladder.

The very last of all, I saw.  For Latimer, having finally gone for a
lantern, held it so that its light shone down the scuttle.  Wolf Larsen
was nearly to the top, though I could not see him.  All that was visible
was the mass of men fastened upon him.  It squirmed about, like some huge
many-legged spider, and swayed back and forth to the regular roll of the
vessel.  And still, step by step with long intervals between, the mass
ascended.  Once it tottered, about to fall back, but the broken hold was
regained and it still went up.

“Who is it?” Latimer cried.

In the rays of the lantern I could see his perplexed face peering down.

“Larsen,” I heard a muffled voice from within the mass.

Latimer reached down with his free hand.  I saw a hand shoot up to clasp
his.  Latimer pulled, and the next couple of steps were made with a rush.
Then Wolf Larsen’s other hand reached up and clutched the edge of the
scuttle.  The mass swung clear of the ladder, the men still clinging to
their escaping foe.  They began to drop off, to be brushed off against
the sharp edge of the scuttle, to be knocked off by the legs which were
now kicking powerfully.  Leach was the last to go, falling sheer back
from the top of the scuttle and striking on head and shoulders upon his
sprawling mates beneath.  Wolf Larsen and the lantern disappeared, and we
were left in darkness.




CHAPTER XV


There was a deal of cursing and groaning as the men at the bottom of the
ladder crawled to their feet.

“Somebody strike a light, my thumb’s out of joint,” said one of the men,
Parsons, a swarthy, saturnine man, boat-steerer in Standish’s boat, in
which Harrison was puller.

“You’ll find it knockin’ about by the bitts,” Leach said, sitting down on
the edge of the bunk in which I was concealed.

There was a fumbling and a scratching of matches, and the sea-lamp flared
up, dim and smoky, and in its weird light bare-legged men moved about
nursing their bruises and caring for their hurts.  Oofty-Oofty laid hold
of Parsons’s thumb, pulling it out stoutly and snapping it back into
place.  I noticed at the same time that the Kanaka’s knuckles were laid
open clear across and to the bone.  He exhibited them, exposing beautiful
white teeth in a grin as he did so, and explaining that the wounds had
come from striking Wolf Larsen in the mouth.

“So it was you, was it, you black beggar?” belligerently demanded one
Kelly, an Irish-American and a longshoreman, making his first trip to
sea, and boat-puller for Kerfoot.

As he made the demand he spat out a mouthful of blood and teeth and
shoved his pugnacious face close to Oofty-Oofty.  The Kanaka leaped
backward to his bunk, to return with a second leap, flourishing a long
knife.

“Aw, go lay down, you make me tired,” Leach interfered.  He was
evidently, for all of his youth and inexperience, cock of the forecastle.
“G’wan, you Kelly.  You leave Oofty alone.  How in hell did he know it
was you in the dark?”

Kelly subsided with some muttering, and the Kanaka flashed his white
teeth in a grateful smile.  He was a beautiful creature, almost feminine
in the pleasing lines of his figure, and there was a softness and
dreaminess in his large eyes which seemed to contradict his well-earned
reputation for strife and action.

“How did he get away?” Johnson asked.

He was sitting on the side of his bunk, the whole pose of his figure
indicating utter dejection and hopelessness.  He was still breathing
heavily from the exertion he had made.  His shirt had been ripped
entirely from him in the struggle, and blood from a gash in the cheek was
flowing down his naked chest, marking a red path across his white thigh
and dripping to the floor.

“Because he is the devil, as I told you before,” was Leach’s answer; and
thereat he was on his feet and raging his disappointment with tears in
his eyes.

“And not one of you to get a knife!” was his unceasing lament.

But the rest of the hands had a lively fear of consequences to come and
gave no heed to him.

“How’ll he know which was which?” Kelly asked, and as he went on he
looked murderously about him—“unless one of us peaches.”

“He’ll know as soon as ever he claps eyes on us,” Parsons replied.  “One
look at you’d be enough.”

“Tell him the deck flopped up and gouged yer teeth out iv yer jaw,” Louis
grinned.  He was the only man who was not out of his bunk, and he was
jubilant in that he possessed no bruises to advertise that he had had a
hand in the night’s work.  “Just wait till he gets a glimpse iv yer mugs
to-morrow, the gang iv ye,” he chuckled.

“We’ll say we thought it was the mate,” said one.  And another, “I know
what I’ll say—that I heered a row, jumped out of my bunk, got a jolly
good crack on the jaw for my pains, and sailed in myself.  Couldn’t tell
who or what it was in the dark and just hit out.”

“An’ ’twas me you hit, of course,” Kelly seconded, his face brightening
for the moment.

Leach and Johnson took no part in the discussion, and it was plain to see
that their mates looked upon them as men for whom the worst was
inevitable, who were beyond hope and already dead.  Leach stood their
fears and reproaches for some time.  Then he broke out:

“You make me tired!  A nice lot of gazabas you are!  If you talked less
with yer mouth and did something with yer hands, he’d a-ben done with by
now.  Why couldn’t one of you, just one of you, get me a knife when I
sung out?  You make me sick!  A-beefin’ and bellerin’ ’round, as though
he’d kill you when he gets you!  You know damn well he wont.  Can’t
afford to.  No shipping masters or beach-combers over here, and he wants
yer in his business, and he wants yer bad.  Who’s to pull or steer or
sail ship if he loses yer?  It’s me and Johnson have to face the music.
Get into yer bunks, now, and shut yer faces; I want to get some sleep.”

“That’s all right all right,” Parsons spoke up.  “Mebbe he won’t do for
us, but mark my words, hell ’ll be an ice-box to this ship from now on.”

All the while I had been apprehensive concerning my own predicament.
What would happen to me when these men discovered my presence?  I could
never fight my way out as Wolf Larsen had done.  And at this moment
Latimer called down the scuttles:

“Hump!  The old man wants you!”

“He ain’t down here!” Parsons called back.

“Yes, he is,” I said, sliding out of the bunk and striving my hardest to
keep my voice steady and bold.

The sailors looked at me in consternation.  Fear was strong in their
faces, and the devilishness which comes of fear.

“I’m coming!” I shouted up to Latimer.

“No you don’t!” Kelly cried, stepping between me and the ladder, his
right hand shaped into a veritable strangler’s clutch.  “You damn little
sneak!  I’ll shut yer mouth!”

“Let him go,” Leach commanded.

“Not on yer life,” was the angry retort.

Leach never changed his position on the edge of the bunk.  “Let him go, I
say,” he repeated; but this time his voice was gritty and metallic.

The Irishman wavered.  I made to step by him, and he stood aside.  When I
had gained the ladder, I turned to the circle of brutal and malignant
faces peering at me through the semi-darkness.  A sudden and deep
sympathy welled up in me.  I remembered the Cockney’s way of putting it.
How God must have hated them that they should be tortured so!

“I have seen and heard nothing, believe me,” I said quietly.

“I tell yer, he’s all right,” I could hear Leach saying as I went up the
ladder.  “He don’t like the old man no more nor you or me.”

I found Wolf Larsen in the cabin, stripped and bloody, waiting for me.
He greeted me with one of his whimsical smiles.

“Come, get to work, Doctor.  The signs are favourable for an extensive
practice this voyage.  I don’t know what the _Ghost_ would have been
without you, and if I could only cherish such noble sentiments I would
tell you her master is deeply grateful.”

I knew the run of the simple medicine-chest the _Ghost_ carried, and
while I was heating water on the cabin stove and getting the things ready
for dressing his wounds, he moved about, laughing and chatting, and
examining his hurts with a calculating eye.  I had never before seen him
stripped, and the sight of his body quite took my breath away.  It has
never been my weakness to exalt the flesh—far from it; but there is
enough of the artist in me to appreciate its wonder.

I must say that I was fascinated by the perfect lines of Wolf Larsen’s
figure, and by what I may term the terrible beauty of it.  I had noted
the men in the forecastle.  Powerfully muscled though some of them were,
there had been something wrong with all of them, an insufficient
development here, an undue development there, a twist or a crook that
destroyed symmetry, legs too short or too long, or too much sinew or bone
exposed, or too little.  Oofty-Oofty had been the only one whose lines
were at all pleasing, while, in so far as they pleased, that far had they
been what I should call feminine.

But Wolf Larsen was the man-type, the masculine, and almost a god in his
perfectness.  As he moved about or raised his arms the great muscles
leapt and moved under the satiny skin.  I have forgotten to say that the
bronze ended with his face.  His body, thanks to his Scandinavian stock,
was fair as the fairest woman’s.  I remember his putting his hand up to
feel of the wound on his head, and my watching the biceps move like a
living thing under its white sheath.  It was the biceps that had nearly
crushed out my life once, that I had seen strike so many killing blows.
I could not take my eyes from him.  I stood motionless, a roll of
antiseptic cotton in my hand unwinding and spilling itself down to the
floor.

He noticed me, and I became conscious that I was staring at him.

“God made you well,” I said.

“Did he?” he answered.  “I have often thought so myself, and wondered
why.”

“Purpose—” I began.

“Utility,” he interrupted.  “This body was made for use.  These muscles
were made to grip, and tear, and destroy living things that get between
me and life.  But have you thought of the other living things?  They,
too, have muscles, of one kind and another, made to grip, and tear, and
destroy; and when they come between me and life, I out-grip them,
out-tear them, out-destroy them.  Purpose does not explain that.  Utility
does.”

“It is not beautiful,” I protested.

“Life isn’t, you mean,” he smiled.  “Yet you say I was made well.  Do you
see this?”

He braced his legs and feet, pressing the cabin floor with his toes in a
clutching sort of way.  Knots and ridges and mounds of muscles writhed
and bunched under the skin.

“Feel them,” he commanded.

They were hard as iron.  And I observed, also, that his whole body had
unconsciously drawn itself together, tense and alert; that muscles were
softly crawling and shaping about the hips, along the back, and across
the shoulders; that the arms were slightly lifted, their muscles
contracting, the fingers crooking till the hands were like talons; and
that even the eyes had changed expression and into them were coming
watchfulness and measurement and a light none other than of battle.

“Stability, equilibrium,” he said, relaxing on the instant and sinking
his body back into repose.  “Feet with which to clutch the ground, legs
to stand on and to help withstand, while with arms and hands, teeth and
nails, I struggle to kill and to be not killed.  Purpose?  Utility is the
better word.”

I did not argue.  I had seen the mechanism of the primitive fighting
beast, and I was as strongly impressed as if I had seen the engines of a
great battleship or Atlantic liner.

I was surprised, considering the fierce struggle in the forecastle, at
the superficiality of his hurts, and I pride myself that I dressed them
dexterously.  With the exception of several bad wounds, the rest were
merely severe bruises and lacerations.  The blow which he had received
before going overboard had laid his scalp open several inches.  This,
under his direction, I cleansed and sewed together, having first shaved
the edges of the wound.  Then the calf of his leg was badly lacerated and
looked as though it had been mangled by a bulldog.  Some sailor, he told
me, had laid hold of it by his teeth, at the beginning of the fight, and
hung on and been dragged to the top of the forecastle ladder, when he was
kicked loose.

“By the way, Hump, as I have remarked, you are a handy man,” Wolf Larsen
began, when my work was done.  “As you know, we’re short a mate.
Hereafter you shall stand watches, receive seventy-five dollars per
month, and be addressed fore and aft as Mr. Van Weyden.”

“I—I don’t understand navigation, you know,” I gasped.

“Not necessary at all.”

“I really do not care to sit in the high places,” I objected.  “I find
life precarious enough in my present humble situation.  I have no
experience.  Mediocrity, you see, has its compensations.”

He smiled as though it were all settled.

“I won’t be mate on this hell-ship!” I cried defiantly.

I saw his face grow hard and the merciless glitter come into his eyes.
He walked to the door of his room, saying:

“And now, Mr. Van Weyden, good-night.”

“Good-night, Mr. Larsen,” I answered weakly.




CHAPTER XVI


I cannot say that the position of mate carried with it anything more
joyful than that there were no more dishes to wash.  I was ignorant of
the simplest duties of mate, and would have fared badly indeed, had the
sailors not sympathized with me.  I knew nothing of the minutiæ of ropes
and rigging, of the trimming and setting of sails; but the sailors took
pains to put me to rights,—Louis proving an especially good teacher,—and
I had little trouble with those under me.

With the hunters it was otherwise.  Familiar in varying degree with the
sea, they took me as a sort of joke.  In truth, it was a joke to me, that
I, the veriest landsman, should be filling the office of mate; but to be
taken as a joke by others was a different matter.  I made no complaint,
but Wolf Larsen demanded the most punctilious sea etiquette in my
case,—far more than poor Johansen had ever received; and at the expense
of several rows, threats, and much grumbling, he brought the hunters to
time.  I was “Mr. Van Weyden” fore and aft, and it was only unofficially
that Wolf Larsen himself ever addressed me as “Hump.”

It was amusing.  Perhaps the wind would haul a few points while we were
at dinner, and as I left the table he would say, “Mr. Van Weyden, will
you kindly put about on the port tack.”  And I would go on deck, beckon
Louis to me, and learn from him what was to be done.  Then, a few minutes
later, having digested his instructions and thoroughly mastered the
manœuvre, I would proceed to issue my orders.  I remember an early
instance of this kind, when Wolf Larsen appeared on the scene just as I
had begun to give orders.  He smoked his cigar and looked on quietly till
the thing was accomplished, and then paced aft by my side along the
weather poop.

“Hump,” he said, “I beg pardon, Mr. Van Weyden, I congratulate you.  I
think you can now fire your father’s legs back into the grave to him.
You’ve discovered your own and learned to stand on them.  A little
rope-work, sail-making, and experience with storms and such things, and
by the end of the voyage you could ship on any coasting schooner.”

It was during this period, between the death of Johansen and the arrival
on the sealing grounds, that I passed my pleasantest hours on the
_Ghost_.  Wolf Larsen was quite considerate, the sailors helped me, and I
was no longer in irritating contact with Thomas Mugridge.  And I make
free to say, as the days went by, that I found I was taking a certain
secret pride in myself.  Fantastic as the situation was,—a land-lubber
second in command,—I was, nevertheless, carrying it off well; and during
that brief time I was proud of myself, and I grew to love the heave and
roll of the _Ghost_ under my feet as she wallowed north and west through
the tropic sea to the islet where we filled our water-casks.

But my happiness was not unalloyed.  It was comparative, a period of less
misery slipped in between a past of great miseries and a future of great
miseries.  For the _Ghost_, so far as the seamen were concerned, was a
hell-ship of the worst description.  They never had a moment’s rest or
peace.  Wolf Larsen treasured against them the attempt on his life and
the drubbing he had received in the forecastle; and morning, noon, and
night, and all night as well, he devoted himself to making life unlivable
for them.

He knew well the psychology of the little thing, and it was the little
things by which he kept the crew worked up to the verge of madness.  I
have seen Harrison called from his bunk to put properly away a misplaced
paintbrush, and the two watches below haled from their tired sleep to
accompany him and see him do it.  A little thing, truly, but when
multiplied by the thousand ingenious devices of such a mind, the mental
state of the men in the forecastle may be slightly comprehended.

Of course much grumbling went on, and little outbursts were continually
occurring.  Blows were struck, and there were always two or three men
nursing injuries at the hands of the human beast who was their master.
Concerted action was impossible in face of the heavy arsenal of weapons
carried in the steerage and cabin.  Leach and Johnson were the two
particular victims of Wolf Larsen’s diabolic temper, and the look of
profound melancholy which had settled on Johnson’s face and in his eyes
made my heart bleed.

With Leach it was different.  There was too much of the fighting beast in
him.  He seemed possessed by an insatiable fury which gave no time for
grief.  His lips had become distorted into a permanent snarl, which at
mere sight of Wolf Larsen broke out in sound, horrible and menacing and,
I do believe, unconsciously.  I have seen him follow Wolf Larsen about
with his eyes, like an animal its keeper, the while the animal-like snarl
sounded deep in his throat and vibrated forth between his teeth.

I remember once, on deck, in bright day, touching him on the shoulder as
preliminary to giving an order.  His back was toward me, and at the first
feel of my hand he leaped upright in the air and away from me, snarling
and turning his head as he leaped.  He had for the moment mistaken me for
the man he hated.

Both he and Johnson would have killed Wolf Larsen at the slightest
opportunity, but the opportunity never came.  Wolf Larsen was too wise
for that, and, besides, they had no adequate weapons.  With their fists
alone they had no chance whatever.  Time and again he fought it out with
Leach who fought back always, like a wildcat, tooth and nail and fist,
until stretched, exhausted or unconscious, on the deck.  And he was never
averse to another encounter.  All the devil that was in him challenged
the devil in Wolf Larsen.  They had but to appear on deck at the same
time, when they would be at it, cursing, snarling, striking; and I have
seen Leach fling himself upon Wolf Larsen without warning or provocation.
Once he threw his heavy sheath-knife, missing Wolf Larsen’s throat by an
inch.  Another time he dropped a steel marlinspike from the mizzen
crosstree.  It was a difficult cast to make on a rolling ship, but the
sharp point of the spike, whistling seventy-five feet through the air,
barely missed Wolf Larsen’s head as he emerged from the cabin
companion-way and drove its length two inches and over into the solid
deck-planking.  Still another time, he stole into the steerage, possessed
himself of a loaded shot-gun, and was making a rush for the deck with it
when caught by Kerfoot and disarmed.

I often wondered why Wolf Larsen did not kill him and make an end of it.
But he only laughed and seemed to enjoy it.  There seemed a certain spice
about it, such as men must feel who take delight in making pets of
ferocious animals.

“It gives a thrill to life,” he explained to me, “when life is carried in
one’s hand.  Man is a natural gambler, and life is the biggest stake he
can lay.  The greater the odds, the greater the thrill.  Why should I
deny myself the joy of exciting Leach’s soul to fever-pitch?  For that
matter, I do him a kindness.  The greatness of sensation is mutual.  He
is living more royally than any man for’ard, though he does not know it.
For he has what they have not—purpose, something to do and be done, an
all-absorbing end to strive to attain, the desire to kill me, the hope
that he may kill me.  Really, Hump, he is living deep and high.  I doubt
that he has ever lived so swiftly and keenly before, and I honestly envy
him, sometimes, when I see him raging at the summit of passion and
sensibility.”

“Ah, but it is cowardly, cowardly!” I cried.  “You have all the
advantage.”

“Of the two of us, you and I, who is the greater coward?” he asked
seriously.  “If the situation is unpleasing, you compromise with your
conscience when you make yourself a party to it.  If you were really
great, really true to yourself, you would join forces with Leach and
Johnson.  But you are afraid, you are afraid.  You want to live.  The
life that is in you cries out that it must live, no matter what the cost;
so you live ignominiously, untrue to the best you dream of, sinning
against your whole pitiful little code, and, if there were a hell,
heading your soul straight for it.  Bah!  I play the braver part.  I do
no sin, for I am true to the promptings of the life that is in me.  I am
sincere with my soul at least, and that is what you are not.”

There was a sting in what he said.  Perhaps, after all, I was playing a
cowardly part.  And the more I thought about it the more it appeared that
my duty to myself lay in doing what he had advised, lay in joining forces
with Johnson and Leach and working for his death.  Right here, I think,
entered the austere conscience of my Puritan ancestry, impelling me
toward lurid deeds and sanctioning even murder as right conduct.  I dwelt
upon the idea.  It would be a most moral act to rid the world of such a
monster.  Humanity would be better and happier for it, life fairer and
sweeter.

I pondered it long, lying sleepless in my bunk and reviewing in endless
procession the facts of the situation.  I talked with Johnson and Leach,
during the night watches when Wolf Larsen was below.  Both men had lost
hope—Johnson, because of temperamental despondency; Leach, because he had
beaten himself out in the vain struggle and was exhausted.  But he caught
my hand in a passionate grip one night, saying:

“I think yer square, Mr. Van Weyden.  But stay where you are and keep yer
mouth shut.  Say nothin’ but saw wood.  We’re dead men, I know it; but
all the same you might be able to do us a favour some time when we need
it damn bad.”

It was only next day, when Wainwright Island loomed to windward, close
abeam, that Wolf Larsen opened his mouth in prophecy.  He had attacked
Johnson, been attacked by Leach, and had just finished whipping the pair
of them.

“Leach,” he said, “you know I’m going to kill you some time or other,
don’t you?”

A snarl was the answer.

“And as for you, Johnson, you’ll get so tired of life before I’m through
with you that you’ll fling yourself over the side.  See if you don’t.”

“That’s a suggestion,” he added, in an aside to me.  “I’ll bet you a
month’s pay he acts upon it.”

I had cherished a hope that his victims would find an opportunity to
escape while filling our water-barrels, but Wolf Larsen had selected his
spot well.  The _Ghost_ lay half-a-mile beyond the surf-line of a lonely
beach.  Here debouched a deep gorge, with precipitous, volcanic walls
which no man could scale.  And here, under his direct supervision—for he
went ashore himself—Leach and Johnson filled the small casks and rolled
them down to the beach.  They had no chance to make a break for liberty
in one of the boats.

Harrison and Kelly, however, made such an attempt.  They composed one of
the boats’ crews, and their task was to ply between the schooner and the
shore, carrying a single cask each trip.  Just before dinner, starting
for the beach with an empty barrel, they altered their course and bore
away to the left to round the promontory which jutted into the sea
between them and liberty.  Beyond its foaming base lay the pretty
villages of the Japanese colonists and smiling valleys which penetrated
deep into the interior.  Once in the fastnesses they promised, and the
two men could defy Wolf Larsen.

I had observed Henderson and Smoke loitering about the deck all morning,
and I now learned why they were there.  Procuring their rifles, they
opened fire in a leisurely manner, upon the deserters.  It was a
cold-blooded exhibition of marksmanship.  At first their bullets zipped
harmlessly along the surface of the water on either side the boat; but,
as the men continued to pull lustily, they struck closer and closer.

“Now, watch me take Kelly’s right oar,” Smoke said, drawing a more
careful aim.

I was looking through the glasses, and I saw the oar-blade shatter as he
shot.  Henderson duplicated it, selecting Harrison’s right oar.  The boat
slewed around.  The two remaining oars were quickly broken.  The men
tried to row with the splinters, and had them shot out of their hands.
Kelly ripped up a bottom board and began paddling, but dropped it with a
cry of pain as its splinters drove into his hands.  Then they gave up,
letting the boat drift till a second boat, sent from the shore by Wolf
Larsen, took them in tow and brought them aboard.

Late that afternoon we hove up anchor and got away.  Nothing was before
us but the three or four months’ hunting on the sealing grounds.  The
outlook was black indeed, and I went about my work with a heavy heart.
An almost funereal gloom seemed to have descended upon the _Ghost_.  Wolf
Larsen had taken to his bunk with one of his strange, splitting
headaches.  Harrison stood listlessly at the wheel, half supporting
himself by it, as though wearied by the weight of his flesh.  The rest of
the men were morose and silent.  I came upon Kelly crouching to the lee
of the forecastle scuttle, his head on his knees, his arms about his
head, in an attitude of unutterable despondency.

Johnson I found lying full length on the forecastle head, staring at the
troubled churn of the forefoot, and I remembered with horror the
suggestion Wolf Larsen had made.  It seemed likely to bear fruit.  I
tried to break in on the man’s morbid thoughts by calling him away, but
he smiled sadly at me and refused to obey.

Leach approached me as I returned aft.

“I want to ask a favour, Mr. Van Weyden,” he said.  “If it’s yer luck to
ever make ’Frisco once more, will you hunt up Matt McCarthy?  He’s my old
man.  He lives on the Hill, back of the Mayfair bakery, runnin’ a
cobbler’s shop that everybody knows, and you’ll have no trouble.  Tell
him I lived to be sorry for the trouble I brought him and the things I
done, and—and just tell him ‘God bless him,’ for me.”

I nodded my head, but said, “We’ll all win back to San Francisco, Leach,
and you’ll be with me when I go to see Matt McCarthy.”

“I’d like to believe you,” he answered, shaking my hand, “but I can’t.
Wolf Larsen ’ll do for me, I know it; and all I can hope is, he’ll do it
quick.”

And as he left me I was aware of the same desire at my heart.  Since it
was to be done, let it be done with despatch.  The general gloom had
gathered me into its folds.  The worst appeared inevitable; and as I
paced the deck, hour after hour, I found myself afflicted with Wolf
Larsen’s repulsive ideas.  What was it all about?  Where was the grandeur
of life that it should permit such wanton destruction of human souls?  It
was a cheap and sordid thing after all, this life, and the sooner over
the better.  Over and done with!  I, too, leaned upon the rail and gazed
longingly into the sea, with the certainty that sooner or later I should
be sinking down, down, through the cool green depths of its oblivion.




CHAPTER XVII


Strange to say, in spite of the general foreboding, nothing of especial
moment happened on the _Ghost_.  We ran on to the north and west till we
raised the coast of Japan and picked up with the great seal herd.  Coming
from no man knew where in the illimitable Pacific, it was travelling
north on its annual migration to the rookeries of Bering Sea.  And north
we travelled with it, ravaging and destroying, flinging the naked
carcasses to the shark and salting down the skins so that they might
later adorn the fair shoulders of the women of the cities.

It was wanton slaughter, and all for woman’s sake.  No man ate of the
seal meat or the oil.  After a good day’s killing I have seen our decks
covered with hides and bodies, slippery with fat and blood, the scuppers
running red; masts, ropes, and rails spattered with the sanguinary
colour; and the men, like butchers plying their trade, naked and red of
arm and hand, hard at work with ripping and flensing-knives, removing the
skins from the pretty sea-creatures they had killed.

It was my task to tally the pelts as they came aboard from the boats, to
oversee the skinning and afterward the cleansing of the decks and
bringing things ship-shape again.  It was not pleasant work.  My soul and
my stomach revolted at it; and yet, in a way, this handling and directing
of many men was good for me.  It developed what little executive ability
I possessed, and I was aware of a toughening or hardening which I was
undergoing and which could not be anything but wholesome for “Sissy” Van
Weyden.

One thing I was beginning to feel, and that was that I could never again
be quite the same man I had been.  While my hope and faith in human life
still survived Wolf Larsen’s destructive criticism, he had nevertheless
been a cause of change in minor matters.  He had opened up for me the
world of the real, of which I had known practically nothing and from
which I had always shrunk.  I had learned to look more closely at life as
it was lived, to recognize that there were such things as facts in the
world, to emerge from the realm of mind and idea and to place certain
values on the concrete and objective phases of existence.

I saw more of Wolf Larsen than ever when we had gained the grounds.  For
when the weather was fair and we were in the midst of the herd, all hands
were away in the boats, and left on board were only he and I, and Thomas
Mugridge, who did not count.  But there was no play about it.  The six
boats, spreading out fan-wise from the schooner until the first weather
boat and the last lee boat were anywhere from ten to twenty miles apart,
cruised along a straight course over the sea till nightfall or bad
weather drove them in.  It was our duty to sail the _Ghost_ well to
leeward of the last lee boat, so that all the boats should have fair wind
to run for us in case of squalls or threatening weather.

It is no slight matter for two men, particularly when a stiff wind has
sprung up, to handle a vessel like the _Ghost_, steering, keeping
look-out for the boats, and setting or taking in sail; so it devolved
upon me to learn, and learn quickly.  Steering I picked up easily, but
running aloft to the crosstrees and swinging my whole weight by my arms
when I left the ratlines and climbed still higher, was more difficult.
This, too, I learned, and quickly, for I felt somehow a wild desire to
vindicate myself in Wolf Larsen’s eyes, to prove my right to live in ways
other than of the mind.  Nay, the time came when I took joy in the run of
the masthead and in the clinging on by my legs at that precarious height
while I swept the sea with glasses in search of the boats.

I remember one beautiful day, when the boats left early and the reports
of the hunters’ guns grew dim and distant and died away as they scattered
far and wide over the sea.  There was just the faintest wind from the
westward; but it breathed its last by the time we managed to get to
leeward of the last lee boat.  One by one—I was at the masthead and
saw—the six boats disappeared over the bulge of the earth as they
followed the seal into the west.  We lay, scarcely rolling on the placid
sea, unable to follow.  Wolf Larsen was apprehensive.  The barometer was
down, and the sky to the east did not please him.  He studied it with
unceasing vigilance.

“If she comes out of there,” he said, “hard and snappy, putting us to
windward of the boats, it’s likely there’ll be empty bunks in steerage
and fo’c’sle.”

By eleven o’clock the sea had become glass.  By midday, though we were
well up in the northerly latitudes, the heat was sickening.  There was no
freshness in the air.  It was sultry and oppressive, reminding me of what
the old Californians term “earthquake weather.”  There was something
ominous about it, and in intangible ways one was made to feel that the
worst was about to come.  Slowly the whole eastern sky filled with clouds
that over-towered us like some black sierra of the infernal regions.  So
clearly could one see cañon, gorge, and precipice, and the shadows that
lie therein, that one looked unconsciously for the white surf-line and
bellowing caverns where the sea charges on the land.  And still we rocked
gently, and there was no wind.

“It’s no squall,” Wolf Larsen said.  “Old Mother Nature’s going to get
up on her hind legs and howl for all that’s in her, and it’ll keep us
jumping, Hump, to pull through with half our boats.  You’d better run up
and loosen the topsails.”

“But if it is going to howl, and there are only two of us?” I asked, a
note of protest in my voice.

“Why we’ve got to make the best of the first of it and run down to our
boats before our canvas is ripped out of us.  After that I don’t give a
rap what happens.  The sticks ’ll stand it, and you and I will have to,
though we’ve plenty cut out for us.”

Still the calm continued.  We ate dinner, a hurried and anxious meal for
me with eighteen men abroad on the sea and beyond the bulge of the earth,
and with that heaven-rolling mountain range of clouds moving slowly down
upon us.  Wolf Larsen did not seem affected, however; though I noticed,
when we returned to the deck, a slight twitching of the nostrils, a
perceptible quickness of movement.  His face was stern, the lines of it
had grown hard, and yet in his eyes—blue, clear blue this day—there was a
strange brilliancy, a bright scintillating light.  It struck me that he
was joyous, in a ferocious sort of way; that he was glad there was an
impending struggle; that he was thrilled and upborne with knowledge that
one of the great moments of living, when the tide of life surges up in
flood, was upon him.

Once, and unwitting that he did so or that I saw, he laughed aloud,
mockingly and defiantly, at the advancing storm.  I see him yet standing
there like a pigmy out of the _Arabian Nights_ before the huge front of
some malignant genie.  He was daring destiny, and he was unafraid.

He walked to the galley.  “Cooky, by the time you’ve finished pots and
pans you’ll be wanted on deck.  Stand ready for a call.”

“Hump,” he said, becoming cognizant of the fascinated gaze I bent upon
him, “this beats whisky and is where your Omar misses.  I think he only
half lived after all.”

The western half of the sky had by now grown murky.  The sun had dimmed
and faded out of sight.  It was two in the afternoon, and a ghostly
twilight, shot through by wandering purplish lights, had descended upon
us.  In this purplish light Wolf Larsen’s face glowed and glowed, and to
my excited fancy he appeared encircled by a halo.  We lay in the midst of
an unearthly quiet, while all about us were signs and omens of oncoming
sound and movement.  The sultry heat had become unendurable.  The sweat
was standing on my forehead, and I could feel it trickling down my nose.
I felt as though I should faint, and reached out to the rail for support.

And then, just then, the faintest possible whisper of air passed by.  It
was from the east, and like a whisper it came and went.  The drooping
canvas was not stirred, and yet my face had felt the air and been cooled.

“Cooky,” Wolf Larsen called in a low voice.  Thomas Mugridge turned a
pitiable scared face.  “Let go that foreboom tackle and pass it across,
and when she’s willing let go the sheet and come in snug with the tackle.
And if you make a mess of it, it will be the last you ever make.
Understand?”

“Mr. Van Weyden, stand by to pass the head-sails over.  Then jump for the
topsails and spread them quick as God’ll let you—the quicker you do it
the easier you’ll find it.  As for Cooky, if he isn’t lively bat him
between the eyes.”

I was aware of the compliment and pleased, in that no threat had
accompanied my instructions.  We were lying head to north-west, and it
was his intention to jibe over all with the first puff.

“We’ll have the breeze on our quarter,” he explained to me.  “By the last
guns the boats were bearing away slightly to the south’ard.”

He turned and walked aft to the wheel.  I went forward and took my
station at the jibs.  Another whisper of wind, and another, passed by.
The canvas flapped lazily.

“Thank Gawd she’s not comin’ all of a bunch, Mr. Van Weyden,” was the
Cockney’s fervent ejaculation.

And I was indeed thankful, for I had by this time learned enough to know,
with all our canvas spread, what disaster in such event awaited us.  The
whispers of wind became puffs, the sails filled, the _Ghost_ moved.  Wolf
Larsen put the wheel hard up, to port, and we began to pay off.  The wind
was now dead astern, muttering and puffing stronger and stronger, and my
head-sails were pounding lustily.  I did not see what went on elsewhere,
though I felt the sudden surge and heel of the schooner as the
wind-pressures changed to the jibing of the fore- and main-sails.  My
hands were full with the flying-jib, jib, and staysail; and by the time
this part of my task was accomplished the _Ghost_ was leaping into the
south-west, the wind on her quarter and all her sheets to starboard.
Without pausing for breath, though my heart was beating like a
trip-hammer from my exertions, I sprang to the topsails, and before the
wind had become too strong we had them fairly set and were coiling down.
Then I went aft for orders.

Wolf Larsen nodded approval and relinquished the wheel to me.  The wind
was strengthening steadily and the sea rising.  For an hour I steered,
each moment becoming more difficult.  I had not the experience to steer
at the gait we were going on a quartering course.

“Now take a run up with the glasses and raise some of the boats.  We’ve
made at least ten knots, and we’re going twelve or thirteen now.  The old
girl knows how to walk.”

I contested myself with the fore crosstrees, some seventy feet above the
deck.  As I searched the vacant stretch of water before me, I
comprehended thoroughly the need for haste if we were to recover any of
our men.  Indeed, as I gazed at the heavy sea through which we were
running, I doubted that there was a boat afloat.  It did not seem
possible that such frail craft could survive such stress of wind and
water.

I could not feel the full force of the wind, for we were running with it;
but from my lofty perch I looked down as though outside the _Ghost_ and
apart from her, and saw the shape of her outlined sharply against the
foaming sea as she tore along instinct with life.  Sometimes she would
lift and send across some great wave, burying her starboard-rail from
view, and covering her deck to the hatches with the boiling ocean.  At
such moments, starting from a windward roll, I would go flying through
the air with dizzying swiftness, as though I clung to the end of a huge,
inverted pendulum, the arc of which, between the greater rolls, must have
been seventy feet or more.  Once, the terror of this giddy sweep
overpowered me, and for a while I clung on, hand and foot, weak and
trembling, unable to search the sea for the missing boats or to behold
aught of the sea but that which roared beneath and strove to overwhelm
the _Ghost_.

But the thought of the men in the midst of it steadied me, and in my
quest for them I forgot myself.  For an hour I saw nothing but the naked,
desolate sea.  And then, where a vagrant shaft of sunlight struck the
ocean and turned its surface to wrathful silver, I caught a small black
speck thrust skyward for an instant and swallowed up.  I waited
patiently.  Again the tiny point of black projected itself through the
wrathful blaze a couple of points off our port-bow.  I did not attempt to
shout, but communicated the news to Wolf Larsen by waving my arm.  He
changed the course, and I signalled affirmation when the speck showed
dead ahead.

It grew larger, and so swiftly that for the first time I fully
appreciated the speed of our flight.  Wolf Larsen motioned for me to come
down, and when I stood beside him at the wheel gave me instructions for
heaving to.

“Expect all hell to break loose,” he cautioned me, “but don’t mind it.
Yours is to do your own work and to have Cooky stand by the fore-sheet.”

I managed to make my way forward, but there was little choice of sides,
for the weather-rail seemed buried as often as the lee.  Having
instructed Thomas Mugridge as to what he was to do, I clambered into the
fore-rigging a few feet.  The boat was now very close, and I could make
out plainly that it was lying head to wind and sea and dragging on its
mast and sail, which had been thrown overboard and made to serve as a
sea-anchor.  The three men were bailing.  Each rolling mountain whelmed
them from view, and I would wait with sickening anxiety, fearing that
they would never appear again.  Then, and with black suddenness, the boat
would shoot clear through the foaming crest, bow pointed to the sky, and
the whole length of her bottom showing, wet and dark, till she seemed on
end.  There would be a fleeting glimpse of the three men flinging water
in frantic haste, when she would topple over and fall into the yawning
valley, bow down and showing her full inside length to the stern upreared
almost directly above the bow.  Each time that she reappeared was a
miracle.

The _Ghost_ suddenly changed her course, keeping away, and it came to me
with a shock that Wolf Larsen was giving up the rescue as impossible.
Then I realized that he was preparing to heave to, and dropped to the
deck to be in readiness.  We were now dead before the wind, the boat far
away and abreast of us.  I felt an abrupt easing of the schooner, a loss
for the moment of all strain and pressure, coupled with a swift
acceleration of speed.  She was rushing around on her heel into the wind.

As she arrived at right angles to the sea, the full force of the wind
(from which we had hitherto run away) caught us.  I was unfortunately and
ignorantly facing it.  It stood up against me like a wall, filling my
lungs with air which I could not expel.  And as I choked and strangled,
and as the _Ghost_ wallowed for an instant, broadside on and rolling
straight over and far into the wind, I beheld a huge sea rise far above
my head.  I turned aside, caught my breath, and looked again.  The wave
over-topped the _Ghost_, and I gazed sheer up and into it.  A shaft of
sunlight smote the over-curl, and I caught a glimpse of translucent,
rushing green, backed by a milky smother of foam.

Then it descended, pandemonium broke loose, everything happened at once.
I was struck a crushing, stunning blow, nowhere in particular and yet
everywhere.  My hold had been broken loose, I was under water, and the
thought passed through my mind that this was the terrible thing of which
I had heard, the being swept in the trough of the sea.  My body struck
and pounded as it was dashed helplessly along and turned over and over,
and when I could hold my breath no longer, I breathed the stinging salt
water into my lungs.  But through it all I clung to the one idea—_I must
get the jib backed over to windward_.  I had no fear of death.  I had no
doubt but that I should come through somehow.  And as this idea of
fulfilling Wolf Larsen’s order persisted in my dazed consciousness, I
seemed to see him standing at the wheel in the midst of the wild welter,
pitting his will against the will of the storm and defying it.

I brought up violently against what I took to be the rail, breathed, and
breathed the sweet air again.  I tried to rise, but struck my head and
was knocked back on hands and knees.  By some freak of the waters I had
been swept clear under the forecastle-head and into the eyes.  As I
scrambled out on all fours, I passed over the body of Thomas Mugridge,
who lay in a groaning heap.  There was no time to investigate.  I must
get the jib backed over.

When I emerged on deck it seemed that the end of everything had come.  On
all sides there was a rending and crashing of wood and steel and canvas.
The _Ghost_ was being wrenched and torn to fragments.  The foresail and
fore-topsail, emptied of the wind by the manœuvre, and with no one to
bring in the sheet in time, were thundering into ribbons, the heavy boom
threshing and splintering from rail to rail.  The air was thick with
flying wreckage, detached ropes and stays were hissing and coiling like
snakes, and down through it all crashed the gaff of the foresail.

The spar could not have missed me by many inches, while it spurred me to
action.  Perhaps the situation was not hopeless.  I remembered Wolf
Larsen’s caution.  He had expected all hell to break loose, and here it
was.  And where was he?  I caught sight of him toiling at the main-sheet,
heaving it in and flat with his tremendous muscles, the stern of the
schooner lifted high in the air and his body outlined against a white
surge of sea sweeping past.  All this, and more,—a whole world of chaos
and wreck,—in possibly fifteen seconds I had seen and heard and grasped.

I did not stop to see what had become of the small boat, but sprang to
the jib-sheet.  The jib itself was beginning to slap, partially filling
and emptying with sharp reports; but with a turn of the sheet and the
application of my whole strength each time it slapped, I slowly backed
it.  This I know: I did my best.  I pulled till I burst open the ends of
all my fingers; and while I pulled, the flying-jib and staysail split
their cloths apart and thundered into nothingness.

Still I pulled, holding what I gained each time with a double turn until
the next slap gave me more.  Then the sheet gave with greater ease, and
Wolf Larsen was beside me, heaving in alone while I was busied taking up
the slack.

“Make fast!” he shouted.  “And come on!”

As I followed him, I noted that in spite of rack and ruin a rough order
obtained.  The _Ghost_ was hove to.  She was still in working order, and
she was still working.  Though the rest of her sails were gone, the jib,
backed to windward, and the mainsail hauled down flat, were themselves
holding, and holding her bow to the furious sea as well.

I looked for the boat, and, while Wolf Larsen cleared the boat-tackles,
saw it lift to leeward on a big sea and not a score of feet away.  And, so
nicely had he made his calculation, we drifted fairly down upon it, so
that nothing remained to do but hook the tackles to either end and hoist
it aboard.  But this was not done so easily as it is written.

In the bow was Kerfoot, Oofty-Oofty in the stern, and Kelly amidships.
As we drifted closer the boat would rise on a wave while we sank in the
trough, till almost straight above me I could see the heads of the three
men craned overside and looking down.  Then, the next moment, we would
lift and soar upward while they sank far down beneath us.  It seemed
incredible that the next surge should not crush the _Ghost_ down upon the
tiny eggshell.

But, at the right moment, I passed the tackle to the Kanaka, while Wolf
Larsen did the same thing forward to Kerfoot.  Both tackles were hooked
in a trice, and the three men, deftly timing the roll, made a
simultaneous leap aboard the schooner.  As the _Ghost_ rolled her side
out of water, the boat was lifted snugly against her, and before the
return roll came, we had heaved it in over the side and turned it bottom
up on the deck.  I noticed blood spouting from Kerfoot’s left hand.  In
some way the third finger had been crushed to a pulp.  But he gave no
sign of pain, and with his single right hand helped us lash the boat in
its place.

“Stand by to let that jib over, you Oofty!” Wolf Larsen commanded, the
very second we had finished with the boat.  “Kelly, come aft and slack
off the main-sheet!  You, Kerfoot, go for’ard and see what’s become of
Cooky!  Mr. Van Weyden, run aloft again, and cut away any stray stuff on
your way!”

And having commanded, he went aft with his peculiar tigerish leaps to the
wheel.  While I toiled up the fore-shrouds the _Ghost_ slowly paid off.
This time, as we went into the trough of the sea and were swept, there
were no sails to carry away.  And, halfway to the crosstrees and
flattened against the rigging by the full force of the wind so that it
would have been impossible for me to have fallen, the _Ghost_ almost on
her beam-ends and the masts parallel with the water, I looked, not down,
but at almost right angles from the perpendicular, to the deck of the
_Ghost_.  But I saw, not the deck, but where the deck should have been,
for it was buried beneath a wild tumbling of water.  Out of this water I
could see the two masts rising, and that was all.  The _Ghost_, for the
moment, was buried beneath the sea.  As she squared off more and more,
escaping from the side pressure, she righted herself and broke her deck,
like a whale’s back, through the ocean surface.

Then we raced, and wildly, across the wild sea, the while I hung like a
fly in the crosstrees and searched for the other boats.  In half-an-hour
I sighted the second one, swamped and bottom up, to which were
desperately clinging Jock Horner, fat Louis, and Johnson.  This time I
remained aloft, and Wolf Larsen succeeded in heaving to without being
swept.  As before, we drifted down upon it.  Tackles were made fast and
lines flung to the men, who scrambled aboard like monkeys.  The boat
itself was crushed and splintered against the schooner’s side as it came
inboard; but the wreck was securely lashed, for it could be patched and
made whole again.

Once more the _Ghost_ bore away before the storm, this time so submerging
herself that for some seconds I thought she would never reappear.  Even
the wheel, quite a deal higher than the waist, was covered and swept
again and again.  At such moments I felt strangely alone with God, alone
with him and watching the chaos of his wrath.  And then the wheel would
reappear, and Wolf Larsen’s broad shoulders, his hands gripping the
spokes and holding the schooner to the course of his will, himself an
earth-god, dominating the storm, flinging its descending waters from him
and riding it to his own ends.  And oh, the marvel of it! the marvel of
it!  That tiny men should live and breathe and work, and drive so frail a
contrivance of wood and cloth through so tremendous an elemental strife.

As before, the _Ghost_ swung out of the trough, lifting her deck again
out of the sea, and dashed before the howling blast.  It was now
half-past five, and half-an-hour later, when the last of the day lost
itself in a dim and furious twilight, I sighted a third boat.  It was
bottom up, and there was no sign of its crew.  Wolf Larsen repeated his
manœuvre, holding off and then rounding up to windward and drifting down
upon it.  But this time he missed by forty feet, the boat passing astern.

“Number four boat!” Oofty-Oofty cried, his keen eyes reading its number
in the one second when it lifted clear of the foam, and upside down.

It was Henderson’s boat and with him had been lost Holyoak and Williams,
another of the deep-water crowd.  Lost they indubitably were; but the
boat remained, and Wolf Larsen made one more reckless effort to recover
it.  I had come down to the deck, and I saw Horner and Kerfoot vainly
protest against the attempt.

“By God, I’ll not be robbed of my boat by any storm that ever blew out of
hell!” he shouted, and though we four stood with our heads together that
we might hear, his voice seemed faint and far, as though removed from us
an immense distance.

“Mr. Van Weyden!” he cried, and I heard through the tumult as one might
hear a whisper.  “Stand by that jib with Johnson and Oofty!  The rest of
you tail aft to the mainsheet!  Lively now! or I’ll sail you all into
Kingdom Come!  Understand?”

And when he put the wheel hard over and the _Ghost’s_ bow swung off,
there was nothing for the hunters to do but obey and make the best of a
risky chance.  How great the risk I realized when I was once more buried
beneath the pounding seas and clinging for life to the pinrail at the
foot of the foremast.  My fingers were torn loose, and I swept across to
the side and over the side into the sea.  I could not swim, but before I
could sink I was swept back again.  A strong hand gripped me, and when
the _Ghost_ finally emerged, I found that I owed my life to Johnson.  I
saw him looking anxiously about him, and noted that Kelly, who had come
forward at the last moment, was missing.

This time, having missed the boat, and not being in the same position as
in the previous instances, Wolf Larsen was compelled to resort to a
different manœuvre.  Running off before the wind with everything to
starboard, he came about, and returned close-hauled on the port tack.

“Grand!” Johnson shouted in my ear, as we successfully came through the
attendant deluge, and I knew he referred, not to Wolf Larsen’s
seamanship, but to the performance of the _Ghost_ herself.

It was now so dark that there was no sign of the boat; but Wolf Larsen
held back through the frightful turmoil as if guided by unerring
instinct.  This time, though we were continually half-buried, there was
no trough in which to be swept, and we drifted squarely down upon the
upturned boat, badly smashing it as it was heaved inboard.

Two hours of terrible work followed, in which all hands of us—two
hunters, three sailors, Wolf Larsen and I—reefed, first one and then the
other, the jib and mainsail.  Hove to under this short canvas, our decks
were comparatively free of water, while the _Ghost_ bobbed and ducked
amongst the combers like a cork.

I had burst open the ends of my fingers at the very first, and during the
reefing I had worked with tears of pain running down my cheeks.  And when
all was done, I gave up like a woman and rolled upon the deck in the
agony of exhaustion.

In the meantime Thomas Mugridge, like a drowned rat, was being dragged
out from under the forecastle head where he had cravenly ensconced
himself.  I saw him pulled aft to the cabin, and noted with a shock of
surprise that the galley had disappeared.  A clean space of deck showed
where it had stood.

In the cabin I found all hands assembled, sailors as well, and while
coffee was being cooked over the small stove we drank whisky and crunched
hard-tack.  Never in my life had food been so welcome.  And never had hot
coffee tasted so good.  So violently did the _Ghost_ pitch and toss and
tumble that it was impossible for even the sailors to move about without
holding on, and several times, after a cry of “Now she takes it!” we were
heaped upon the wall of the port cabins as though it had been the deck.

“To hell with a look-out,” I heard Wolf Larsen say when we had eaten and
drunk our fill.  “There’s nothing can be done on deck.  If anything’s
going to run us down we couldn’t get out of its way.  Turn in, all hands,
and get some sleep.”

The sailors slipped forward, setting the side-lights as they went, while
the two hunters remained to sleep in the cabin, it not being deemed
advisable to open the slide to the steerage companion-way.  Wolf Larsen
and I, between us, cut off Kerfoot’s crushed finger and sewed up the
stump.  Mugridge, who, during all the time he had been compelled to cook
and serve coffee and keep the fire going, had complained of internal
pains, now swore that he had a broken rib or two.  On examination we
found that he had three.  But his case was deferred to next day,
principally for the reason that I did not know anything about broken ribs
and would first have to read it up.

“I don’t think it was worth it,” I said to Wolf Larsen, “a broken boat
for Kelly’s life.”

“But Kelly didn’t amount to much,” was the reply.  “Good-night.”

After all that had passed, suffering intolerable anguish in my
finger-ends, and with three boats missing, to say nothing of the wild
capers the _Ghost_ was cutting, I should have thought it impossible to
sleep.  But my eyes must have closed the instant my head touched the
pillow, and in utter exhaustion I slept throughout the night, the while
the _Ghost_, lonely and undirected, fought her way through the storm.




CHAPTER XVIII


The next day, while the storm was blowing itself out, Wolf Larsen and I
crammed anatomy and surgery and set Mugridge’s ribs.  Then, when the
storm broke, Wolf Larsen cruised back and forth over that portion of the
ocean where we had encountered it, and somewhat more to the westward,
while the boats were being repaired and new sails made and bent.  Sealing
schooner after sealing schooner we sighted and boarded, most of which
were in search of lost boats, and most of which were carrying boats and
crews they had picked up and which did not belong to them.  For the thick
of the fleet had been to the westward of us, and the boats, scattered far
and wide, had headed in mad flight for the nearest refuge.

Two of our boats, with men all safe, we took off the _Cisco_, and, to
Wolf Larsen’s huge delight and my own grief, he culled Smoke, with Nilson
and Leach, from the _San Diego_.  So that, at the end of five days, we
found ourselves short but four men—Henderson, Holyoak, Williams, and
Kelly,—and were once more hunting on the flanks of the herd.

As we followed it north we began to encounter the dreaded sea-fogs.  Day
after day the boats lowered and were swallowed up almost ere they touched
the water, while we on board pumped the horn at regular intervals and
every fifteen minutes fired the bomb gun.  Boats were continually being
lost and found, it being the custom for a boat to hunt, on lay, with
whatever schooner picked it up, until such time it was recovered by its
own schooner.  But Wolf Larsen, as was to be expected, being a boat
short, took possession of the first stray one and compelled its men to
hunt with the _Ghost_, not permitting them to return to their own
schooner when we sighted it.  I remember how he forced the hunter and his
two men below, a rifle at their breasts, when their captain passed by at
biscuit-toss and hailed us for information.

Thomas Mugridge, so strangely and pertinaciously clinging to life, was
soon limping about again and performing his double duties of cook and
cabin-boy.  Johnson and Leach were bullied and beaten as much as ever,
and they looked for their lives to end with the end of the hunting
season; while the rest of the crew lived the lives of dogs and were
worked like dogs by their pitiless master.  As for Wolf Larsen and
myself, we got along fairly well; though I could not quite rid myself of
the idea that right conduct, for me, lay in killing him.  He fascinated
me immeasurably, and I feared him immeasurably.  And yet, I could not
imagine him lying prone in death.  There was an endurance, as of
perpetual youth, about him, which rose up and forbade the picture.  I
could see him only as living always, and dominating always, fighting and
destroying, himself surviving.

One diversion of his, when we were in the midst of the herd and the sea
was too rough to lower the boats, was to lower with two boat-pullers and
a steerer and go out himself.  He was a good shot, too, and brought many
a skin aboard under what the hunters termed impossible hunting
conditions.  It seemed the breath of his nostrils, this carrying his life
in his hands and struggling for it against tremendous odds.

I was learning more and more seamanship; and one clear day—a thing we
rarely encountered now—I had the satisfaction of running and handling the
_Ghost_ and picking up the boats myself.  Wolf Larsen had been smitten
with one of his headaches, and I stood at the wheel from morning until
evening, sailing across the ocean after the last lee boat, and heaving to
and picking it and the other five up without command or suggestion from
him.

Gales we encountered now and again, for it was a raw and stormy region,
and, in the middle of June, a typhoon most memorable to me and most
important because of the changes wrought through it upon my future.  We
must have been caught nearly at the centre of this circular storm, and
Wolf Larsen ran out of it and to the southward, first under a
double-reefed jib, and finally under bare poles.  Never had I imagined so
great a sea.  The seas previously encountered were as ripples compared
with these, which ran a half-mile from crest to crest and which upreared,
I am confident, above our masthead.  So great was it that Wolf Larsen
himself did not dare heave to, though he was being driven far to the
southward and out of the seal herd.

We must have been well in the path of the trans-Pacific steamships when
the typhoon moderated, and here, to the surprise of the hunters, we found
ourselves in the midst of seals—a second herd, or sort of rear-guard,
they declared, and a most unusual thing.  But it was “Boats over!” the
boom-boom of guns, and the pitiful slaughter through the long day.

It was at this time that I was approached by Leach.  I had just finished
tallying the skins of the last boat aboard, when he came to my side, in
the darkness, and said in a low tone:

“Can you tell me, Mr. Van Weyden, how far we are off the coast, and what
the bearings of Yokohama are?”

My heart leaped with gladness, for I knew what he had in mind, and I gave
him the bearings—west-north-west, and five hundred miles away.

“Thank you, sir,” was all he said as he slipped back into the darkness.

Next morning No. 3 boat and Johnson and Leach were missing.  The
water-breakers and grub-boxes from all the other boats were likewise
missing, as were the beds and sea bags of the two men.  Wolf Larsen was
furious.  He set sail and bore away into the west-north-west, two hunters
constantly at the mastheads and sweeping the sea with glasses, himself
pacing the deck like an angry lion.  He knew too well my sympathy for the
runaways to send me aloft as look-out.

The wind was fair but fitful, and it was like looking for a needle in a
haystack to raise that tiny boat out of the blue immensity.  But he put
the _Ghost_ through her best paces so as to get between the deserters and
the land.  This accomplished, he cruised back and forth across what he
knew must be their course.

On the morning of the third day, shortly after eight bells, a cry that
the boat was sighted came down from Smoke at the masthead.  All hands
lined the rail.  A snappy breeze was blowing from the west with the
promise of more wind behind it; and there, to leeward, in the troubled
silver of the rising sun, appeared and disappeared a black speck.

We squared away and ran for it.  My heart was as lead.  I felt myself
turning sick in anticipation; and as I looked at the gleam of triumph in
Wolf Larsen’s eyes, his form swam before me, and I felt almost
irresistibly impelled to fling myself upon him.  So unnerved was I by the
thought of impending violence to Leach and Johnson that my reason must
have left me.  I know that I slipped down into the steerage in a daze,
and that I was just beginning the ascent to the deck, a loaded shot-gun
in my hands, when I heard the startled cry:

“There’s five men in that boat!”

I supported myself in the companion-way, weak and trembling, while the
observation was being verified by the remarks of the rest of the men.
Then my knees gave from under me and I sank down, myself again, but
overcome by shock at knowledge of what I had so nearly done.  Also, I was
very thankful as I put the gun away and slipped back on deck.

No one had remarked my absence.  The boat was near enough for us to make
out that it was larger than any sealing boat and built on different
lines.  As we drew closer, the sail was taken in and the mast unstepped.
Oars were shipped, and its occupants waited for us to heave to and take
them aboard.

Smoke, who had descended to the deck and was now standing by my side,
began to chuckle in a significant way.  I looked at him inquiringly.

“Talk of a mess!” he giggled.

“What’s wrong?” I demanded.

Again he chuckled.  “Don’t you see there, in the stern-sheets, on the
bottom?  May I never shoot a seal again if that ain’t a woman!”

I looked closely, but was not sure until exclamations broke out on all
sides.  The boat contained four men, and its fifth occupant was certainly
a woman.  We were agog with excitement, all except Wolf Larsen, who was
too evidently disappointed in that it was not his own boat with the two
victims of his malice.

We ran down the flying jib, hauled the jib-sheets to wind-ward and the
main-sheet flat, and came up into the wind.  The oars struck the water,
and with a few strokes the boat was alongside.  I now caught my first
fair glimpse of the woman.  She was wrapped in a long ulster, for the
morning was raw; and I could see nothing but her face and a mass of light
brown hair escaping from under the seaman’s cap on her head.  The eyes
were large and brown and lustrous, the mouth sweet and sensitive, and the
face itself a delicate oval, though sun and exposure to briny wind had
burnt the face scarlet.

She seemed to me like a being from another world.  I was aware of a
hungry out-reaching for her, as of a starving man for bread.  But then, I
had not seen a woman for a very long time.  I know that I was lost in a
great wonder, almost a stupor,—this, then, was a woman?—so that I forgot
myself and my mate’s duties, and took no part in helping the new-comers
aboard.  For when one of the sailors lifted her into Wolf Larsen’s
downstretched arms, she looked up into our curious faces and smiled
amusedly and sweetly, as only a woman can smile, and as I had seen no one
smile for so long that I had forgotten such smiles existed.

“Mr. Van Weyden!”

Wolf Larsen’s voice brought me sharply back to myself.

“Will you take the lady below and see to her comfort?  Make up that spare
port cabin.  Put Cooky to work on it.  And see what you can do for that
face.  It’s burned badly.”

He turned brusquely away from us and began to question the new men.  The
boat was cast adrift, though one of them called it a “bloody shame” with
Yokohama so near.

I found myself strangely afraid of this woman I was escorting aft.  Also
I was awkward.  It seemed to me that I was realizing for the first time
what a delicate, fragile creature a woman is; and as I caught her arm to
help her down the companion stairs, I was startled by its smallness and
softness.  Indeed, she was a slender, delicate woman as women go, but to
me she was so ethereally slender and delicate that I was quite prepared
for her arm to crumble in my grasp.  All this, in frankness, to show my
first impression, after long denial of women in general and of Maud
Brewster in particular.

“No need to go to any great trouble for me,” she protested, when I had
seated her in Wolf Larsen’s arm-chair, which I had dragged hastily from
his cabin.  “The men were looking for land at any moment this morning,
and the vessel should be in by night; don’t you think so?”

Her simple faith in the immediate future took me aback.  How could I
explain to her the situation, the strange man who stalked the sea like
Destiny, all that it had taken me months to learn?  But I answered
honestly:

“If it were any other captain except ours, I should say you would be
ashore in Yokohama to-morrow.  But our captain is a strange man, and I
beg of you to be prepared for anything—understand?—for anything.”

“I—I confess I hardly do understand,” she hesitated, a perturbed but not
frightened expression in her eyes.  “Or is it a misconception of mine
that shipwrecked people are always shown every consideration?  This is
such a little thing, you know.  We are so close to land.”

“Candidly, I do not know,” I strove to reassure her.  “I wished merely to
prepare you for the worst, if the worst is to come.  This man, this
captain, is a brute, a demon, and one can never tell what will be his
next fantastic act.”

I was growing excited, but she interrupted me with an “Oh, I see,” and
her voice sounded weary.  To think was patently an effort.  She was
clearly on the verge of physical collapse.

She asked no further questions, and I vouchsafed no remark, devoting
myself to Wolf Larsen’s command, which was to make her comfortable.  I
bustled about in quite housewifely fashion, procuring soothing lotions
for her sunburn, raiding Wolf Larsen’s private stores for a bottle of
port I knew to be there, and directing Thomas Mugridge in the preparation
of the spare state-room.

The wind was freshening rapidly, the _Ghost_ heeling over more and more,
and by the time the state-room was ready she was dashing through the
water at a lively clip.  I had quite forgotten the existence of Leach and
Johnson, when suddenly, like a thunderclap, “Boat ho!” came down the open
companion-way.  It was Smoke’s unmistakable voice, crying from the
masthead.  I shot a glance at the woman, but she was leaning back in the
arm-chair, her eyes closed, unutterably tired.  I doubted that she had
heard, and I resolved to prevent her seeing the brutality I knew would
follow the capture of the deserters.  She was tired.  Very good.  She
should sleep.

There were swift commands on deck, a stamping of feet and a slapping of
reef-points as the _Ghost_ shot into the wind and about on the other
tack.  As she filled away and heeled, the arm-chair began to slide across
the cabin floor, and I sprang for it just in time to prevent the rescued
woman from being spilled out.

Her eyes were too heavy to suggest more than a hint of the sleepy
surprise that perplexed her as she looked up at me, and she half
stumbled, half tottered, as I led her to her cabin.  Mugridge grinned
insinuatingly in my face as I shoved him out and ordered him back to his
galley work; and he won his revenge by spreading glowing reports among
the hunters as to what an excellent “lydy’s-myde” I was proving myself to
be.

She leaned heavily against me, and I do believe that she had fallen
asleep again between the arm-chair and the state-room.  This I discovered
when she nearly fell into the bunk during a sudden lurch of the schooner.
She aroused, smiled drowsily, and was off to sleep again; and asleep I
left her, under a heavy pair of sailor’s blankets, her head resting on a
pillow I had appropriated from Wolf Larsen’s bunk.




CHAPTER XIX


I came on deck to find the _Ghost_ heading up close on the port tack and
cutting in to windward of a familiar spritsail close-hauled on the same
tack ahead of us.  All hands were on deck, for they knew that something
was to happen when Leach and Johnson were dragged aboard.

It was four bells.  Louis came aft to relieve the wheel.  There was a
dampness in the air, and I noticed he had on his oilskins.

“What are we going to have?” I asked him.

“A healthy young slip of a gale from the breath iv it, sir,” he answered,
“with a splatter iv rain just to wet our gills an’ no more.”

“Too bad we sighted them,” I said, as the _Ghost’s_ bow was flung off a
point by a large sea and the boat leaped for a moment past the jibs and
into our line of vision.

Louis gave a spoke and temporized.  “They’d never iv made the land, sir,
I’m thinkin’.”

“Think not?” I queried.

“No, sir.  Did you feel that?”  (A puff had caught the schooner, and he
was forced to put the wheel up rapidly to keep her out of the wind.)
“’Tis no egg-shell’ll float on this sea an hour come, an’ it’s a stroke
iv luck for them we’re here to pick ’em up.”

Wolf Larsen strode aft from amidships, where he had been talking with the
rescued men.  The cat-like springiness in his tread was a little more
pronounced than usual, and his eyes were bright and snappy.

“Three oilers and a fourth engineer,” was his greeting.  “But we’ll make
sailors out of them, or boat-pullers at any rate.  Now, what of the
lady?”

I know not why, but I was aware of a twinge or pang like the cut of a
knife when he mentioned her.  I thought it a certain silly fastidiousness
on my part, but it persisted in spite of me, and I merely shrugged my
shoulders in answer.

Wolf Larsen pursed his lips in a long, quizzical whistle.

“What’s her name, then?” he demanded.

“I don’t know,” I replied.  “She is asleep.  She was very tired.  In
fact, I am waiting to hear the news from you.  What vessel was it?”

“Mail steamer,” he answered shortly.  “_The City of Tokio_, from ’Frisco,
bound for Yokohama.  Disabled in that typhoon.  Old tub.  Opened up top
and bottom like a sieve.  They were adrift four days.  And you don’t know
who or what she is, eh?—maid, wife, or widow?  Well, well.”

He shook his head in a bantering way, and regarded me with laughing eyes.

“Are you—” I began.  It was on the verge of my tongue to ask if he were
going to take the castaways into Yokohama.

“Am I what?” he asked.

“What do you intend doing with Leach and Johnson?”

He shook his head.  “Really, Hump, I don’t know.  You see, with these
additions I’ve about all the crew I want.”

“And they’ve about all the escaping they want,” I said.  “Why not give
them a change of treatment?  Take them aboard, and deal gently with them.
Whatever they have done they have been hounded into doing.”

“By me?”

“By you,” I answered steadily.  “And I give you warning, Wolf Larsen,
that I may forget love of my own life in the desire to kill you if you go
too far in maltreating those poor wretches.”

“Bravo!” he cried.  “You do me proud, Hump!  You’ve found your legs with
a vengeance.  You’re quite an individual.  You were unfortunate in having
your life cast in easy places, but you’re developing, and I like you the
better for it.”

His voice and expression changed.  His face was serious.  “Do you believe
in promises?” he asked.  “Are they sacred things?”

“Of course,” I answered.

“Then here’s a compact,” he went on, consummate actor.  “If I promise not
to lay my hands upon Leach will you promise, in turn, not to attempt to
kill me?”

“Oh, not that I’m afraid of you, not that I’m afraid of you,” he hastened
to add.

I could hardly believe my ears.  What was coming over the man?

“Is it a go?” he asked impatiently.

“A go,” I answered.

His hand went out to mine, and as I shook it heartily I could have sworn
I saw the mocking devil shine up for a moment in his eyes.

We strolled across the poop to the lee side.  The boat was close at hand
now, and in desperate plight.  Johnson was steering, Leach bailing.  We
overhauled them about two feet to their one.  Wolf Larsen motioned Louis
to keep off slightly, and we dashed abreast of the boat, not a score of
feet to windward.  The _Ghost_ blanketed it.  The spritsail flapped
emptily and the boat righted to an even keel, causing the two men swiftly
to change position.  The boat lost headway, and, as we lifted on a huge
surge, toppled and fell into the trough.

It was at this moment that Leach and Johnson looked up into the faces of
their shipmates, who lined the rail amidships.  There was no greeting.
They were as dead men in their comrades’ eyes, and between them was the
gulf that parts the living and the dead.

The next instant they were opposite the poop, where stood Wolf Larsen and
I.  We were falling in the trough, they were rising on the surge.
Johnson looked at me, and I could see that his face was worn and haggard.
I waved my hand to him, and he answered the greeting, but with a wave
that was hopeless and despairing.  It was as if he were saying farewell.
I did not see into the eyes of Leach, for he was looking at Wolf Larsen,
the old and implacable snarl of hatred strong as ever on his face.

Then they were gone astern.  The spritsail filled with the wind,
suddenly, careening the frail open craft till it seemed it would surely
capsize.  A whitecap foamed above it and broke across in a snow-white
smother.  Then the boat emerged, half swamped, Leach flinging the water
out and Johnson clinging to the steering-oar, his face white and anxious.

Wolf Larsen barked a short laugh in my ear and strode away to the weather
side of the poop.  I expected him to give orders for the _Ghost_ to heave
to, but she kept on her course and he made no sign.  Louis stood
imperturbably at the wheel, but I noticed the grouped sailors forward
turning troubled faces in our direction.  Still the _Ghost_ tore along,
till the boat dwindled to a speck, when Wolf Larsen’s voice rang out in
command and he went about on the starboard tack.

Back we held, two miles and more to windward of the struggling
cockle-shell, when the flying jib was run down and the schooner hove to.
The sealing boats are not made for windward work.  Their hope lies in
keeping a weather position so that they may run before the wind for the
schooner when it breezes up.  But in all that wild waste there was no
refuge for Leach and Johnson save on the _Ghost_, and they resolutely
began the windward beat.  It was slow work in the heavy sea that was
running.  At any moment they were liable to be overwhelmed by the hissing
combers.  Time and again and countless times we watched the boat luff
into the big whitecaps, lose headway, and be flung back like a cork.

Johnson was a splendid seaman, and he knew as much about small boats as
he did about ships.  At the end of an hour and a half he was nearly
alongside, standing past our stern on the last leg out, aiming to fetch
us on the next leg back.

“So you’ve changed your mind?” I heard Wolf Larsen mutter, half to
himself, half to them as though they could hear.  “You want to come
aboard, eh?  Well, then, just keep a-coming.”

“Hard up with that helm!” he commanded Oofty-Oofty, the Kanaka, who had
in the meantime relieved Louis at the wheel.

Command followed command.  As the schooner paid off, the fore- and
main-sheets were slacked away for fair wind.  And before the wind we
were, and leaping, when Johnson, easing his sheet at imminent peril, cut
across our wake a hundred feet away.  Again Wolf Larsen laughed, at the
same time beckoning them with his arm to follow.  It was evidently his
intention to play with them,—a lesson, I took it, in lieu of a beating,
though a dangerous lesson, for the frail craft stood in momentary danger
of being overwhelmed.

Johnson squared away promptly and ran after us.  There was nothing else
for him to do.  Death stalked everywhere, and it was only a matter of
time when some one of those many huge seas would fall upon the boat, roll
over it, and pass on.

“’Tis the fear iv death at the hearts iv them,” Louis muttered in my ear,
as I passed forward to see to taking in the flying jib and staysail.

“Oh, he’ll heave to in a little while and pick them up,” I answered
cheerfully.  “He’s bent upon giving them a lesson, that’s all.”

Louis looked at me shrewdly.  “Think so?” he asked.

“Surely,” I answered.  “Don’t you?”

“I think nothing but iv my own skin, these days,” was his answer.  “An’
’tis with wonder I’m filled as to the workin’ out iv things.  A pretty
mess that ’Frisco whisky got me into, an’ a prettier mess that woman’s
got you into aft there.  Ah, it’s myself that knows ye for a blitherin’
fool.”

“What do you mean?” I demanded; for, having sped his shaft, he was
turning away.

“What do I mean?” he cried.  “And it’s you that asks me!  ’Tis not what I
mean, but what the Wolf ’ll mean.  The Wolf, I said, the Wolf!”

“If trouble comes, will you stand by?” I asked impulsively, for he had
voiced my own fear.

“Stand by?  ’Tis old fat Louis I stand by, an’ trouble enough it’ll be.
We’re at the beginnin’ iv things, I’m tellin’ ye, the bare beginnin’ iv
things.”

“I had not thought you so great a coward,” I sneered.

He favoured me with a contemptuous stare.  “If I raised never a hand for
that poor fool,”—pointing astern to the tiny sail,—“d’ye think I’m
hungerin’ for a broken head for a woman I never laid me eyes upon before
this day?”

I turned scornfully away and went aft.

“Better get in those topsails, Mr. Van Weyden,” Wolf Larsen said, as I
came on the poop.

I felt relief, at least as far as the two men were concerned.  It was
clear he did not wish to run too far away from them.  I picked up hope at
the thought and put the order swiftly into execution.  I had scarcely
opened my mouth to issue the necessary commands, when eager men were
springing to halyards and downhauls, and others were racing aloft.  This
eagerness on their part was noted by Wolf Larsen with a grim smile.

Still we increased our lead, and when the boat had dropped astern several
miles we hove to and waited.  All eyes watched it coming, even Wolf
Larsen’s; but he was the only unperturbed man aboard.  Louis, gazing
fixedly, betrayed a trouble in his face he was not quite able to hide.

The boat drew closer and closer, hurling along through the seething green
like a thing alive, lifting and sending and uptossing across the
huge-backed breakers, or disappearing behind them only to rush into sight
again and shoot skyward.  It seemed impossible that it could continue to
live, yet with each dizzying sweep it did achieve the impossible.  A
rain-squall drove past, and out of the flying wet the boat emerged,
almost upon us.

“Hard up, there!” Wolf Larsen shouted, himself springing to the wheel and
whirling it over.

Again the _Ghost_ sprang away and raced before the wind, and for two
hours Johnson and Leach pursued us.  We hove to and ran away, hove to and
ran away, and ever astern the struggling patch of sail tossed skyward and
fell into the rushing valleys.  It was a quarter of a mile away when a
thick squall of rain veiled it from view.  It never emerged.  The wind
blew the air clear again, but no patch of sail broke the troubled
surface.  I thought I saw, for an instant, the boat’s bottom show black
in a breaking crest.  At the best, that was all.  For Johnson and Leach
the travail of existence had ceased.

The men remained grouped amidships.  No one had gone below, and no one
was speaking.  Nor were any looks being exchanged.  Each man seemed
stunned—deeply contemplative, as it were, and, not quite sure, trying to
realize just what had taken place.  Wolf Larsen gave them little time for
thought.  He at once put the _Ghost_ upon her course—a course which meant
the seal herd and not Yokohama harbour.  But the men were no longer eager
as they pulled and hauled, and I heard curses amongst them, which left
their lips smothered and as heavy and lifeless as were they.  Not so was
it with the hunters.  Smoke the irrepressible related a story, and they
descended into the steerage, bellowing with laughter.

As I passed to leeward of the galley on my way aft I was approached by
the engineer we had rescued.  His face was white, his lips were
trembling.

“Good God! sir, what kind of a craft is this?” he cried.

“You have eyes, you have seen,” I answered, almost brutally, what of the
pain and fear at my own heart.

“Your promise?” I said to Wolf Larsen.

“I was not thinking of taking them aboard when I made that promise,” he
answered.  “And anyway, you’ll agree I’ve not laid my hands upon them.”

“Far from it, far from it,” he laughed a moment later.

I made no reply.  I was incapable of speaking, my mind was too confused.
I must have time to think, I knew.  This woman, sleeping even now in the
spare cabin, was a responsibility, which I must consider, and the only
rational thought that flickered through my mind was that I must do
nothing hastily if I were to be any help to her at all.




CHAPTER XX


The remainder of the day passed uneventfully.  The young slip of a gale,
having wetted our gills, proceeded to moderate.  The fourth engineer and
the three oilers, after a warm interview with Wolf Larsen, were furnished
with outfits from the slop-chests, assigned places under the hunters in
the various boats and watches on the vessel, and bundled forward into the
forecastle.  They went protestingly, but their voices were not loud.
They were awed by what they had already seen of Wolf Larsen’s character,
while the tale of woe they speedily heard in the forecastle took the last
bit of rebellion out of them.

Miss Brewster—we had learned her name from the engineer—slept on and on.
At supper I requested the hunters to lower their voices, so she was not
disturbed; and it was not till next morning that she made her appearance.
It had been my intention to have her meals served apart, but Wolf Larsen
put down his foot.  Who was she that she should be too good for cabin
table and cabin society? had been his demand.

But her coming to the table had something amusing in it.  The hunters
fell silent as clams.  Jock Horner and Smoke alone were unabashed,
stealing stealthy glances at her now and again, and even taking part in
the conversation.  The other four men glued their eyes on their plates
and chewed steadily and with thoughtful precision, their ears moving and
wobbling, in time with their jaws, like the ears of so many animals.

Wolf Larsen had little to say at first, doing no more than reply when he
was addressed.  Not that he was abashed.  Far from it.  This woman was a
new type to him, a different breed from any he had ever known, and he was
curious.  He studied her, his eyes rarely leaving her face unless to
follow the movements of her hands or shoulders.  I studied her myself,
and though it was I who maintained the conversation, I know that I was a
bit shy, not quite self-possessed.  His was the perfect poise, the
supreme confidence in self, which nothing could shake; and he was no more
timid of a woman than he was of storm and battle.

“And when shall we arrive at Yokohama?” she asked, turning to him and
looking him squarely in the eyes.

There it was, the question flat.  The jaws stopped working, the ears
ceased wobbling, and though eyes remained glued on plates, each man
listened greedily for the answer.

“In four months, possibly three if the season closes early,” Wolf Larsen
said.

She caught her breath and stammered, “I—I thought—I was given to
understand that Yokohama was only a day’s sail away.  It—”  Here she
paused and looked about the table at the circle of unsympathetic faces
staring hard at the plates.  “It is not right,” she concluded.

“That is a question you must settle with Mr. Van Weyden there,” he
replied, nodding to me with a mischievous twinkle.  “Mr. Van Weyden is
what you may call an authority on such things as rights.  Now I, who am
only a sailor, would look upon the situation somewhat differently.  It
may possibly be your misfortune that you have to remain with us, but it
is certainly our good fortune.”

He regarded her smilingly.  Her eyes fell before his gaze, but she lifted
them again, and defiantly, to mine.  I read the unspoken question there:
was it right?  But I had decided that the part I was to play must be a
neutral one, so I did not answer.

“What do you think?” she demanded.

“That it is unfortunate, especially if you have any engagements falling
due in the course of the next several months.  But, since you say that
you were voyaging to Japan for your health, I can assure you that it will
improve no better anywhere than aboard the _Ghost_.”

I saw her eyes flash with indignation, and this time it was I who dropped
mine, while I felt my face flushing under her gaze.  It was cowardly, but
what else could I do?

“Mr. Van Weyden speaks with the voice of authority,” Wolf Larsen laughed.

I nodded my head, and she, having recovered herself, waited expectantly.

“Not that he is much to speak of now,” Wolf Larsen went on, “but he has
improved wonderfully.  You should have seen him when he came on board.  A
more scrawny, pitiful specimen of humanity one could hardly conceive.
Isn’t that so, Kerfoot?”

Kerfoot, thus directly addressed, was startled into dropping his knife on
the floor, though he managed to grunt affirmation.

“Developed himself by peeling potatoes and washing dishes.  Eh, Kerfoot?”

Again that worthy grunted.

“Look at him now.  True, he is not what you would term muscular, but
still he has muscles, which is more than he had when he came aboard.
Also, he has legs to stand on.  You would not think so to look at him,
but he was quite unable to stand alone at first.”

The hunters were snickering, but she looked at me with a sympathy in her
eyes which more than compensated for Wolf Larsen’s nastiness.  In truth,
it had been so long since I had received sympathy that I was softened,
and I became then, and gladly, her willing slave.  But I was angry with
Wolf Larsen.  He was challenging my manhood with his slurs, challenging
the very legs he claimed to be instrumental in getting for me.

“I may have learned to stand on my own legs,” I retorted.  “But I have
yet to stamp upon others with them.”

He looked at me insolently.  “Your education is only half completed,
then,” he said dryly, and turned to her.

“We are very hospitable upon the _Ghost_.  Mr. Van Weyden has discovered
that.  We do everything to make our guests feel at home, eh, Mr. Van
Weyden?”

“Even to the peeling of potatoes and the washing of dishes,” I answered,
“to say nothing to wringing their necks out of very fellowship.”

“I beg of you not to receive false impressions of us from Mr. Van
Weyden,” he interposed with mock anxiety.  “You will observe, Miss
Brewster, that he carries a dirk in his belt, a—ahem—a most unusual thing
for a ship’s officer to do.  While really very estimable, Mr. Van Weyden
is sometimes—how shall I say?—er—quarrelsome, and harsh measures are
necessary.  He is quite reasonable and fair in his calm moments, and as
he is calm now he will not deny that only yesterday he threatened my
life.”

I was well-nigh choking, and my eyes were certainly fiery.  He drew
attention to me.

“Look at him now.  He can scarcely control himself in your presence.  He
is not accustomed to the presence of ladies anyway.  I shall have to arm
myself before I dare go on deck with him.”

He shook his head sadly, murmuring, “Too bad, too bad,” while the hunters
burst into guffaws of laughter.

The deep-sea voices of these men, rumbling and bellowing in the confined
space, produced a wild effect.  The whole setting was wild, and for the
first time, regarding this strange woman and realizing how incongruous
she was in it, I was aware of how much a part of it I was myself.  I knew
these men and their mental processes, was one of them myself, living the
seal-hunting life, eating the seal-hunting fare, thinking, largely, the
seal-hunting thoughts.  There was for me no strangeness to it, to the
rough clothes, the coarse faces, the wild laughter, and the lurching
cabin walls and swaying sea-lamps.

As I buttered a piece of bread my eyes chanced to rest upon my hand.  The
knuckles were skinned and inflamed clear across, the fingers swollen, the
nails rimmed with black.  I felt the mattress-like growth of beard on my
neck, knew that the sleeve of my coat was ripped, that a button was
missing from the throat of the blue shirt I wore.  The dirk mentioned by
Wolf Larsen rested in its sheath on my hip.  It was very natural that it
should be there,—how natural I had not imagined until now, when I looked
upon it with her eyes and knew how strange it and all that went with it
must appear to her.

But she divined the mockery in Wolf Larsen’s words, and again favoured me
with a sympathetic glance.  But there was a look of bewilderment also in
her eyes.  That it was mockery made the situation more puzzling to her.

“I may be taken off by some passing vessel, perhaps,” she suggested.

“There will be no passing vessels, except other sealing-schooners,” Wolf
Larsen made answer.

“I have no clothes, nothing,” she objected.  “You hardly realize, sir,
that I am not a man, or that I am unaccustomed to the vagrant, careless
life which you and your men seem to lead.”

“The sooner you get accustomed to it, the better,” he said.

“I’ll furnish you with cloth, needles, and thread,” he added.  “I hope it
will not be too dreadful a hardship for you to make yourself a dress or
two.”

She made a wry pucker with her mouth, as though to advertise her
ignorance of dressmaking.  That she was frightened and bewildered, and
that she was bravely striving to hide it, was quite plain to me.

“I suppose you’re like Mr. Van Weyden there, accustomed to having things
done for you.  Well, I think doing a few things for yourself will hardly
dislocate any joints.  By the way, what do you do for a living?”

She regarded him with amazement unconcealed.

“I mean no offence, believe me.  People eat, therefore they must procure
the wherewithal.  These men here shoot seals in order to live; for the
same reason I sail this schooner; and Mr. Van Weyden, for the present at
any rate, earns his salty grub by assisting me.  Now what do you do?”

She shrugged her shoulders.

“Do you feed yourself?  Or does some one else feed you?”

“I’m afraid some one else has fed me most of my life,” she laughed,
trying bravely to enter into the spirit of his quizzing, though I could
see a terror dawning and growing in her eyes as she watched Wolf Larsen.

“And I suppose some one else makes your bed for you?”

“I _have_ made beds,” she replied.

“Very often?”

She shook her head with mock ruefulness.

“Do you know what they do to poor men in the States, who, like you, do
not work for their living?”

“I am very ignorant,” she pleaded.  “What do they do to the poor men who
are like me?”

“They send them to jail.  The crime of not earning a living, in their
case, is called vagrancy.  If I were Mr. Van Weyden, who harps eternally
on questions of right and wrong, I’d ask, by what right do you live when
you do nothing to deserve living?”

“But as you are not Mr. Van Weyden, I don’t have to answer, do I?”

She beamed upon him through her terror-filled eyes, and the pathos of it
cut me to the heart.  I must in some way break in and lead the
conversation into other channels.

“Have you ever earned a dollar by your own labour?” he demanded, certain
of her answer, a triumphant vindictiveness in his voice.

“Yes, I have,” she answered slowly, and I could have laughed aloud at his
crestfallen visage.  “I remember my father giving me a dollar once, when
I was a little girl, for remaining absolutely quiet for five minutes.”

He smiled indulgently.

“But that was long ago,” she continued.  “And you would scarcely demand a
little girl of nine to earn her own living.”

“At present, however,” she said, after another slight pause, “I earn
about eighteen hundred dollars a year.”

With one accord, all eyes left the plates and settled on her.  A woman
who earned eighteen hundred dollars a year was worth looking at.  Wolf
Larsen was undisguised in his admiration.

“Salary, or piece-work?” he asked.

“Piece-work,” she answered promptly.

“Eighteen hundred,” he calculated.  “That’s a hundred and fifty dollars a
month.  Well, Miss Brewster, there is nothing small about the _Ghost_.
Consider yourself on salary during the time you remain with us.”

She made no acknowledgment.  She was too unused as yet to the whims of
the man to accept them with equanimity.

“I forgot to inquire,” he went on suavely, “as to the nature of your
occupation.  What commodities do you turn out?  What tools and materials
do you require?”

“Paper and ink,” she laughed.  “And, oh! also a typewriter.”

“You are Maud Brewster,” I said slowly and with certainty, almost as
though I were charging her with a crime.

Her eyes lifted curiously to mine.  “How do you know?”

“Aren’t you?” I demanded.

She acknowledged her identity with a nod.  It was Wolf Larsen’s turn to
be puzzled.  The name and its magic signified nothing to him.  I was
proud that it did mean something to me, and for the first time in a weary
while I was convincingly conscious of a superiority over him.

“I remember writing a review of a thin little volume—” I had begun
carelessly, when she interrupted me.

“You!” she cried.  “You are—”

She was now staring at me in wide-eyed wonder.

I nodded my identity, in turn.

“Humphrey Van Weyden,” she concluded; then added with a sigh of relief,
and unaware that she had glanced that relief at Wolf Larsen, “I am so
glad.”

“I remember the review,” she went on hastily, becoming aware of the
awkwardness of her remark; “that too, too flattering review.”

“Not at all,” I denied valiantly.  “You impeach my sober judgment and
make my canons of little worth.  Besides, all my brother critics were
with me.  Didn’t Lang include your ‘Kiss Endured’ among the four supreme
sonnets by women in the English language?”

“But you called me the American Mrs. Meynell!”

“Was it not true?” I demanded.

“No, not that,” she answered.  “I was hurt.”

“We can measure the unknown only by the known,” I replied, in my finest
academic manner.  “As a critic I was compelled to place you.  You have
now become a yardstick yourself.  Seven of your thin little volumes are
on my shelves; and there are two thicker volumes, the essays, which, you
will pardon my saying, and I know not which is flattered more, fully
equal your verse.  The time is not far distant when some unknown will
arise in England and the critics will name her the English Maud
Brewster.”

“You are very kind, I am sure,” she murmured; and the very
conventionality of her tones and words, with the host of associations it
aroused of the old life on the other side of the world, gave me a quick
thrill—rich with remembrance but stinging sharp with home-sickness.

“And you are Maud Brewster,” I said solemnly, gazing across at her.

“And you are Humphrey Van Weyden,” she said, gazing back at me with equal
solemnity and awe.  “How unusual!  I don’t understand.  We surely are not
to expect some wildly romantic sea-story from your sober pen.”

“No, I am not gathering material, I assure you,” was my answer.  “I have
neither aptitude nor inclination for fiction.”

“Tell me, why have you always buried yourself in California?” she next
asked.  “It has not been kind of you.  We of the East have seen so very
little of you—too little, indeed, of the Dean of American Letters, the
Second.”

I bowed to, and disclaimed, the compliment.  “I nearly met you, once, in
Philadelphia, some Browning affair or other—you were to lecture, you
know.  My train was four hours late.”

And then we quite forgot where we were, leaving Wolf Larsen stranded and
silent in the midst of our flood of gossip.  The hunters left the table
and went on deck, and still we talked.  Wolf Larsen alone remained.
Suddenly I became aware of him, leaning back from the table and listening
curiously to our alien speech of a world he did not know.

I broke short off in the middle of a sentence.  The present, with all its
perils and anxieties, rushed upon me with stunning force.  It smote Miss
Brewster likewise, a vague and nameless terror rushing into her eyes as
she regarded Wolf Larsen.

He rose to his feet and laughed awkwardly.  The sound of it was metallic.

“Oh, don’t mind me,” he said, with a self-depreciatory wave of his hand.
“I don’t count.  Go on, go on, I pray you.”

But the gates of speech were closed, and we, too, rose from the table and
laughed awkwardly.




CHAPTER XXI


The chagrin Wolf Larsen felt from being ignored by Maud Brewster and me
in the conversation at table had to express itself in some fashion, and
it fell to Thomas Mugridge to be the victim.  He had not mended his ways
nor his shirt, though the latter he contended he had changed.  The
garment itself did not bear out the assertion, nor did the accumulations
of grease on stove and pot and pan attest a general cleanliness.

“I’ve given you warning, Cooky,” Wolf Larsen said, “and now you’ve got to
take your medicine.”

Mugridge’s face turned white under its sooty veneer, and when Wolf Larsen
called for a rope and a couple of men, the miserable Cockney fled wildly
out of the galley and dodged and ducked about the deck with the grinning
crew in pursuit.  Few things could have been more to their liking than to
give him a tow over the side, for to the forecastle he had sent messes
and concoctions of the vilest order.  Conditions favoured the
undertaking.  The _Ghost_ was slipping through the water at no more than
three miles an hour, and the sea was fairly calm.  But Mugridge had
little stomach for a dip in it.  Possibly he had seen men towed before.
Besides, the water was frightfully cold, and his was anything but a
rugged constitution.

As usual, the watches below and the hunters turned out for what promised
sport.  Mugridge seemed to be in rabid fear of the water, and he
exhibited a nimbleness and speed we did not dream he possessed.  Cornered
in the right-angle of the poop and galley, he sprang like a cat to the
top of the cabin and ran aft.  But his pursuers forestalling him, he
doubled back across the cabin, passed over the galley, and gained the
deck by means of the steerage-scuttle.  Straight forward he raced, the
boat-puller Harrison at his heels and gaining on him.  But Mugridge,
leaping suddenly, caught the jib-boom-lift.  It happened in an instant.
Holding his weight by his arms, and in mid-air doubling his body at the
hips, he let fly with both feet.  The oncoming Harrison caught the kick
squarely in the pit of the stomach, groaned involuntarily, and doubled up
and sank backward to the deck.

Hand-clapping and roars of laughter from the hunters greeted the exploit,
while Mugridge, eluding half of his pursuers at the foremast, ran aft and
through the remainder like a runner on the football field.  Straight aft
he held, to the poop and along the poop to the stern.  So great was his
speed that as he curved past the corner of the cabin he slipped and fell.
Nilson was standing at the wheel, and the Cockney’s hurtling body struck
his legs.  Both went down together, but Mugridge alone arose.  By some
freak of pressures, his frail body had snapped the strong man’s leg like
a pipe-stem.

Parsons took the wheel, and the pursuit continued.  Round and round the
decks they went, Mugridge sick with fear, the sailors hallooing and
shouting directions to one another, and the hunters bellowing
encouragement and laughter.  Mugridge went down on the fore-hatch under
three men; but he emerged from the mass like an eel, bleeding at the
mouth, the offending shirt ripped into tatters, and sprang for the
main-rigging.  Up he went, clear up, beyond the ratlines, to the very
masthead.

Half-a-dozen sailors swarmed to the crosstrees after him, where they
clustered and waited while two of their number, Oofty-Oofty and Black
(who was Latimer’s boat-steerer), continued up the thin steel stays,
lifting their bodies higher and higher by means of their arms.

It was a perilous undertaking, for, at a height of over a hundred feet
from the deck, holding on by their hands, they were not in the best of
positions to protect themselves from Mugridge’s feet.  And Mugridge
kicked savagely, till the Kanaka, hanging on with one hand, seized the
Cockney’s foot with the other.  Black duplicated the performance a moment
later with the other foot.  Then the three writhed together in a swaying
tangle, struggling, sliding, and falling into the arms of their mates on
the crosstrees.

The aërial battle was over, and Thomas Mugridge, whining and gibbering,
his mouth flecked with bloody foam, was brought down to deck.  Wolf
Larsen rove a bowline in a piece of rope and slipped it under his
shoulders.  Then he was carried aft and flung into the sea.
Forty,—fifty,—sixty feet of line ran out, when Wolf Larsen cried “Belay!”
Oofty-Oofty took a turn on a bitt, the rope tautened, and the _Ghost_,
lunging onward, jerked the cook to the surface.

It was a pitiful spectacle.  Though he could not drown, and was
nine-lived in addition, he was suffering all the agonies of
half-drowning.  The _Ghost_ was going very slowly, and when her stern
lifted on a wave and she slipped forward she pulled the wretch to the
surface and gave him a moment in which to breathe; but between each lift
the stern fell, and while the bow lazily climbed the next wave the line
slacked and he sank beneath.

I had forgotten the existence of Maud Brewster, and I remembered her with
a start as she stepped lightly beside me.  It was her first time on deck
since she had come aboard.  A dead silence greeted her appearance.

“What is the cause of the merriment?” she asked.

“Ask Captain Larsen,” I answered composedly and coldly, though inwardly
my blood was boiling at the thought that she should be witness to such
brutality.

She took my advice and was turning to put it into execution, when her
eyes lighted on Oofty-Oofty, immediately before her, his body instinct
with alertness and grace as he held the turn of the rope.

“Are you fishing?” she asked him.

He made no reply.  His eyes, fixed intently on the sea astern, suddenly
flashed.

“Shark ho, sir!” he cried.

“Heave in!  Lively!  All hands tail on!” Wolf Larsen shouted, springing
himself to the rope in advance of the quickest.

Mugridge had heard the Kanaka’s warning cry and was screaming madly.  I
could see a black fin cutting the water and making for him with greater
swiftness than he was being pulled aboard.  It was an even toss whether
the shark or we would get him, and it was a matter of moments.  When
Mugridge was directly beneath us, the stern descended the slope of a
passing wave, thus giving the advantage to the shark.  The fin
disappeared.  The belly flashed white in swift upward rush.  Almost
equally swift, but not quite, was Wolf Larsen.  He threw his strength
into one tremendous jerk.  The Cockney’s body left the water; so did part
of the shark’s.  He drew up his legs, and the man-eater seemed no more
than barely to touch one foot, sinking back into the water with a splash.
But at the moment of contact Thomas Mugridge cried out.  Then he came in
like a fresh-caught fish on a line, clearing the rail generously and
striking the deck in a heap, on hands and knees, and rolling over.

But a fountain of blood was gushing forth.  The right foot was missing,
amputated neatly at the ankle.  I looked instantly to Maud Brewster.  Her
face was white, her eyes dilated with horror.  She was gazing, not at
Thomas Mugridge, but at Wolf Larsen.  And he was aware of it, for he
said, with one of his short laughs:

“Man-play, Miss Brewster.  Somewhat rougher, I warrant, than what you
have been used to, but still-man-play.  The shark was not in the
reckoning.  It—”

But at this juncture, Mugridge, who had lifted his head and ascertained
the extent of his loss, floundered over on the deck and buried his teeth
in Wolf Larsen’s leg.  Wolf Larsen stooped, coolly, to the Cockney, and
pressed with thumb and finger at the rear of the jaws and below the ears.
The jaws opened with reluctance, and Wolf Larsen stepped free.

“As I was saying,” he went on, as though nothing unwonted had happened,
“the shark was not in the reckoning.  It was—ahem—shall we say
Providence?”

She gave no sign that she had heard, though the expression of her eyes
changed to one of inexpressible loathing as she started to turn away.
She no more than started, for she swayed and tottered, and reached her
hand weakly out to mine.  I caught her in time to save her from falling,
and helped her to a seat on the cabin.  I thought she might faint
outright, but she controlled herself.

“Will you get a tourniquet, Mr. Van Weyden,” Wolf Larsen called to me.

I hesitated.  Her lips moved, and though they formed no words, she
commanded me with her eyes, plainly as speech, to go to the help of the
unfortunate man.  “Please,” she managed to whisper, and I could but obey.

By now I had developed such skill at surgery that Wolf Larsen, with a few
words of advice, left me to my task with a couple of sailors for
assistants.  For his task he elected a vengeance on the shark.  A heavy
swivel-hook, baited with fat salt-pork, was dropped overside; and by the
time I had compressed the severed veins and arteries, the sailors were
singing and heaving in the offending monster.  I did not see it myself,
but my assistants, first one and then the other, deserted me for a few
moments to run amidships and look at what was going on.  The shark, a
sixteen-footer, was hoisted up against the main-rigging.  Its jaws were
pried apart to their greatest extension, and a stout stake, sharpened at
both ends, was so inserted that when the pries were removed the spread
jaws were fixed upon it.  This accomplished, the hook was cut out.  The
shark dropped back into the sea, helpless, yet with its full strength,
doomed—to lingering starvation—a living death less meet for it than for
the man who devised the punishment.




CHAPTER XXII


I knew what it was as she came toward me.  For ten minutes I had watched
her talking earnestly with the engineer, and now, with a sign for
silence, I drew her out of earshot of the helmsman.  Her face was white
and set; her large eyes, larger than usual what of the purpose in them,
looked penetratingly into mine.  I felt rather timid and apprehensive,
for she had come to search Humphrey Van Weyden’s soul, and Humphrey Van
Weyden had nothing of which to be particularly proud since his advent on
the _Ghost_.

We walked to the break of the poop, where she turned and faced me.  I
glanced around to see that no one was within hearing distance.

“What is it?” I asked gently; but the expression of determination on her
face did not relax.

“I can readily understand,” she began, “that this morning’s affair was
largely an accident; but I have been talking with Mr. Haskins.  He tells
me that the day we were rescued, even while I was in the cabin, two men
were drowned, deliberately drowned—murdered.”

There was a query in her voice, and she faced me accusingly, as though I
were guilty of the deed, or at least a party to it.

“The information is quite correct,” I answered.  “The two men were
murdered.”

“And you permitted it!” she cried.

“I was unable to prevent it, is a better way of phrasing it,” I replied,
still gently.

“But you tried to prevent it?”  There was an emphasis on the “tried,” and
a pleading little note in her voice.

“Oh, but you didn’t,” she hurried on, divining my answer.  “But why
didn’t you?”

I shrugged my shoulders.  “You must remember, Miss Brewster, that you are
a new inhabitant of this little world, and that you do not yet understand
the laws which operate within it.  You bring with you certain fine
conceptions of humanity, manhood, conduct, and such things; but here you
will find them misconceptions.  I have found it so,” I added, with an
involuntary sigh.

She shook her head incredulously.

“What would you advise, then?” I asked.  “That I should take a knife, or
a gun, or an axe, and kill this man?”

She half started back.

“No, not that!”

“Then what should I do?  Kill myself?”

“You speak in purely materialistic terms,” she objected.  “There is such
a thing as moral courage, and moral courage is never without effect.”

“Ah,” I smiled, “you advise me to kill neither him nor myself, but to let
him kill me.”  I held up my hand as she was about to speak.  “For moral
courage is a worthless asset on this little floating world.  Leach, one
of the men who were murdered, had moral courage to an unusual degree.  So
had the other man, Johnson.  Not only did it not stand them in good
stead, but it destroyed them.  And so with me if I should exercise what
little moral courage I may possess.

“You must understand, Miss Brewster, and understand clearly, that this
man is a monster.  He is without conscience.  Nothing is sacred to him,
nothing is too terrible for him to do.  It was due to his whim that I was
detained aboard in the first place.  It is due to his whim that I am
still alive.  I do nothing, can do nothing, because I am a slave to this
monster, as you are now a slave to him; because I desire to live, as you
will desire to live; because I cannot fight and overcome him, just as you
will not be able to fight and overcome him.”

She waited for me to go on.

“What remains?  Mine is the role of the weak.  I remain silent and suffer
ignominy, as you will remain silent and suffer ignominy.  And it is well.
It is the best we can do if we wish to live.  The battle is not always to
the strong.  We have not the strength with which to fight this man; we
must dissimulate, and win, if win we can, by craft.  If you will be
advised by me, this is what you will do.  I know my position is perilous,
and I may say frankly that yours is even more perilous.  We must stand
together, without appearing to do so, in secret alliance.  I shall not be
able to side with you openly, and, no matter what indignities may be put
upon me, you are to remain likewise silent.  We must provoke no scenes
with this man, nor cross his will.  And we must keep smiling faces and be
friendly with him no matter how repulsive it may be.”

She brushed her hand across her forehead in a puzzled way, saying, “Still
I do not understand.”

“You must do as I say,” I interrupted authoritatively, for I saw Wolf
Larsen’s gaze wandering toward us from where he paced up and down with
Latimer amidships.  “Do as I say, and ere long you will find I am right.”

“What shall I do, then?” she asked, detecting the anxious glance I had
shot at the object of our conversation, and impressed, I flatter myself,
with the earnestness of my manner.

“Dispense with all the moral courage you can,” I said briskly.  “Don’t
arouse this man’s animosity.  Be quite friendly with him, talk with him,
discuss literature and art with him—he is fond of such things.  You will
find him an interested listener and no fool.  And for your own sake try
to avoid witnessing, as much as you can, the brutalities of the ship.  It
will make it easier for you to act your part.”

“I am to lie,” she said in steady, rebellious tones, “by speech and
action to lie.”

Wolf Larsen had separated from Latimer and was coming toward us.  I was
desperate.

“Please, please understand me,” I said hurriedly, lowering my voice.
“All your experience of men and things is worthless here.  You must begin
over again.  I know,—I can see it—you have, among other ways, been used
to managing people with your eyes, letting your moral courage speak out
through them, as it were.  You have already managed me with your eyes,
commanded me with them.  But don’t try it on Wolf Larsen.  You could as
easily control a lion, while he would make a mock of you.  He would—I
have always been proud of the fact that I discovered him,” I said,
turning the conversation as Wolf Larsen stepped on the poop and joined
us.  “The editors were afraid of him and the publishers would have none
of him.  But I knew, and his genius and my judgment were vindicated when
he made that magnificent hit with his ‘Forge.’”

“And it was a newspaper poem,” she said glibly.

“It did happen to see the light in a newspaper,” I replied, “but not
because the magazine editors had been denied a glimpse at it.”

“We were talking of Harris,” I said to Wolf Larsen.

“Oh, yes,” he acknowledged.  “I remember the ‘Forge.’  Filled with pretty
sentiments and an almighty faith in human illusions.  By the way, Mr. Van
Weyden, you’d better look in on Cooky.  He’s complaining and restless.”

Thus was I bluntly dismissed from the poop, only to find Mugridge
sleeping soundly from the morphine I had given him.  I made no haste to
return on deck, and when I did I was gratified to see Miss Brewster in
animated conversation with Wolf Larsen.  As I say, the sight gratified
me.  She was following my advice.  And yet I was conscious of a slight
shock or hurt in that she was able to do the thing I had begged her to do
and which she had notably disliked.




CHAPTER XXIII


Brave winds, blowing fair, swiftly drove the _Ghost_ northward into the
seal herd.  We encountered it well up to the forty-fourth parallel, in a
raw and stormy sea across which the wind harried the fog-banks in eternal
flight.  For days at a time we could never see the sun nor take an
observation; then the wind would sweep the face of the ocean clean, the
waves would ripple and flash, and we would learn where we were.  A day of
clear weather might follow, or three days or four, and then the fog would
settle down upon us, seemingly thicker than ever.

The hunting was perilous; yet the boats, lowered day after day, were
swallowed up in the grey obscurity, and were seen no more till nightfall,
and often not till long after, when they would creep in like sea-wraiths,
one by one, out of the grey.  Wainwright—the hunter whom Wolf Larsen had
stolen with boat and men—took advantage of the veiled sea and escaped.
He disappeared one morning in the encircling fog with his two men, and we
never saw them again, though it was not many days when we learned that
they had passed from schooner to schooner until they finally regained
their own.

This was the thing I had set my mind upon doing, but the opportunity
never offered.  It was not in the mate’s province to go out in the boats,
and though I manœuvred cunningly for it, Wolf Larsen never granted me the
privilege.  Had he done so, I should have managed somehow to carry Miss
Brewster away with me.  As it was, the situation was approaching a stage
which I was afraid to consider.  I involuntarily shunned the thought of
it, and yet the thought continually arose in my mind like a haunting
spectre.

I had read sea-romances in my time, wherein figured, as a matter of
course, the lone woman in the midst of a shipload of men; but I learned,
now, that I had never comprehended the deeper significance of such a
situation—the thing the writers harped upon and exploited so thoroughly.
And here it was, now, and I was face to face with it.  That it should be
as vital as possible, it required no more than that the woman should be
Maud Brewster, who now charmed me in person as she had long charmed me
through her work.

No one more out of environment could be imagined.  She was a delicate,
ethereal creature, swaying and willowy, light and graceful of movement.
It never seemed to me that she walked, or, at least, walked after the
ordinary manner of mortals.  Hers was an extreme lithesomeness, and she
moved with a certain indefinable airiness, approaching one as down might
float or as a bird on noiseless wings.

She was like a bit of Dresden china, and I was continually impressed with
what I may call her fragility.  As at the time I caught her arm when
helping her below, so at any time I was quite prepared, should stress or
rough handling befall her, to see her crumble away.  I have never seen
body and spirit in such perfect accord.  Describe her verse, as the
critics have described it, as sublimated and spiritual, and you have
described her body.  It seemed to partake of her soul, to have analogous
attributes, and to link it to life with the slenderest of chains.
Indeed, she trod the earth lightly, and in her constitution there was
little of the robust clay.

She was in striking contrast to Wolf Larsen.  Each was nothing that the
other was, everything that the other was not.  I noted them walking the
deck together one morning, and I likened them to the extreme ends of the
human ladder of evolution—the one the culmination of all savagery, the
other the finished product of the finest civilization.  True, Wolf Larsen
possessed intellect to an unusual degree, but it was directed solely to
the exercise of his savage instincts and made him but the more formidable
a savage.  He was splendidly muscled, a heavy man, and though he strode
with the certitude and directness of the physical man, there was nothing
heavy about his stride.  The jungle and the wilderness lurked in the
uplift and downput of his feet.  He was cat-footed, and lithe, and
strong, always strong.  I likened him to some great tiger, a beast of
prowess and prey.  He looked it, and the piercing glitter that arose at
times in his eyes was the same piercing glitter I had observed in the
eyes of caged leopards and other preying creatures of the wild.

But this day, as I noted them pacing up and down, I saw that it was she
who terminated the walk.  They came up to where I was standing by the
entrance to the companion-way.  Though she betrayed it by no outward
sign, I felt, somehow, that she was greatly perturbed.  She made some
idle remark, looking at me, and laughed lightly enough; but I saw her
eyes return to his, involuntarily, as though fascinated; then they fell,
but not swiftly enough to veil the rush of terror that filled them.

It was in his eyes that I saw the cause of her perturbation.  Ordinarily
grey and cold and harsh, they were now warm and soft and golden, and all
a-dance with tiny lights that dimmed and faded, or welled up till the
full orbs were flooded with a glowing radiance.  Perhaps it was to this
that the golden colour was due; but golden his eyes were, enticing and
masterful, at the same time luring and compelling, and speaking a demand
and clamour of the blood which no woman, much less Maud Brewster, could
misunderstand.

Her own terror rushed upon me, and in that moment of fear—the most
terrible fear a man can experience—I knew that in inexpressible ways she
was dear to me.  The knowledge that I loved her rushed upon me with the
terror, and with both emotions gripping at my heart and causing my blood
at the same time to chill and to leap riotously, I felt myself drawn by a
power without me and beyond me, and found my eyes returning against my
will to gaze into the eyes of Wolf Larsen.  But he had recovered himself.
The golden colour and the dancing lights were gone.  Cold and grey and
glittering they were as he bowed brusquely and turned away.

“I am afraid,” she whispered, with a shiver.  “I am so afraid.”

I, too, was afraid, and what of my discovery of how much she meant to me
my mind was in a turmoil; but, I succeeded in answering quite calmly:

“All will come right, Miss Brewster.  Trust me, it will come right.”

She answered with a grateful little smile that sent my heart pounding,
and started to descend the companion-stairs.

For a long while I remained standing where she had left me.  There was
imperative need to adjust myself, to consider the significance of the
changed aspect of things.  It had come, at last, love had come, when I
least expected it and under the most forbidding conditions.  Of course,
my philosophy had always recognized the inevitableness of the love-call
sooner or later; but long years of bookish silence had made me
inattentive and unprepared.

And now it had come!  Maud Brewster!  My memory flashed back to that
first thin little volume on my desk, and I saw before me, as though in
the concrete, the row of thin little volumes on my library shelf.  How I
had welcomed each of them!  Each year one had come from the press, and to
me each was the advent of the year.  They had voiced a kindred intellect
and spirit, and as such I had received them into a camaraderie of the
mind; but now their place was in my heart.

My heart?  A revulsion of feeling came over me.  I seemed to stand
outside myself and to look at myself incredulously.  Maud Brewster!
Humphrey Van Weyden, “the cold-blooded fish,” the “emotionless monster,”
the “analytical demon,” of Charley Furuseth’s christening, in love!  And
then, without rhyme or reason, all sceptical, my mind flew back to a
small biographical note in the red-bound _Who’s Who_, and I said to
myself, “She was born in Cambridge, and she is twenty-seven years old.”
And then I said, “Twenty-seven years old and still free and fancy free?”
But how did I know she was fancy free?  And the pang of new-born jealousy
put all incredulity to flight.  There was no doubt about it.  I was
jealous; therefore I loved.  And the woman I loved was Maud Brewster.

I, Humphrey Van Weyden, was in love!  And again the doubt assailed me.
Not that I was afraid of it, however, or reluctant to meet it.  On the
contrary, idealist that I was to the most pronounced degree, my
philosophy had always recognized and guerdoned love as the greatest thing
in the world, the aim and the summit of being, the most exquisite pitch
of joy and happiness to which life could thrill, the thing of all things
to be hailed and welcomed and taken into the heart.  But now that it had
come I could not believe.  I could not be so fortunate.  It was too good,
too good to be true.  Symons’s lines came into my head:

   “I wandered all these years among
   A world of women, seeking you.”

And then I had ceased seeking.  It was not for me, this greatest thing in
the world, I had decided.  Furuseth was right; I was abnormal, an
“emotionless monster,” a strange bookish creature, capable of pleasuring
in sensations only of the mind.  And though I had been surrounded by
women all my days, my appreciation of them had been æsthetic and nothing
more.  I had actually, at times, considered myself outside the pale, a
monkish fellow denied the eternal or the passing passions I saw and
understood so well in others.  And now it had come!  Undreamed of and
unheralded, it had come.  In what could have been no less than an
ecstasy, I left my post at the head of the companion-way and started
along the deck, murmuring to myself those beautiful lines of Mrs.
Browning:

   “I lived with visions for my company
   Instead of men and women years ago,
   And found them gentle mates, nor thought to know
   A sweeter music than they played to me.”

But the sweeter music was playing in my ears, and I was blind and
oblivious to all about me.  The sharp voice of Wolf Larsen aroused me.

“What the hell are you up to?” he was demanding.

I had strayed forward where the sailors were painting, and I came to
myself to find my advancing foot on the verge of overturning a paint-pot.

“Sleep-walking, sunstroke,—what?” he barked.

“No; indigestion,” I retorted, and continued my walk as if nothing
untoward had occurred.




CHAPTER XXIV


Among the most vivid memories of my life are those of the events on the
_Ghost_ which occurred during the forty hours succeeding the discovery of
my love for Maud Brewster.  I, who had lived my life in quiet places,
only to enter at the age of thirty-five upon a course of the most
irrational adventure I could have imagined, never had more incident and
excitement crammed into any forty hours of my experience.  Nor can I
quite close my ears to a small voice of pride which tells me I did not do
so badly, all things considered.

To begin with, at the midday dinner, Wolf Larsen informed the hunters
that they were to eat thenceforth in the steerage.  It was an
unprecedented thing on sealing-schooners, where it is the custom for the
hunters to rank, unofficially as officers.  He gave no reason, but his
motive was obvious enough.  Horner and Smoke had been displaying a
gallantry toward Maud Brewster, ludicrous in itself and inoffensive to
her, but to him evidently distasteful.

The announcement was received with black silence, though the other four
hunters glanced significantly at the two who had been the cause of their
banishment.  Jock Horner, quiet as was his way, gave no sign; but the
blood surged darkly across Smoke’s forehead, and he half opened his mouth
to speak.  Wolf Larsen was watching him, waiting for him, the steely
glitter in his eyes; but Smoke closed his mouth again without having said
anything.

“Anything to say?” the other demanded aggressively.

It was a challenge, but Smoke refused to accept it.

“About what?” he asked, so innocently that Wolf Larsen was disconcerted,
while the others smiled.

“Oh, nothing,” Wolf Larsen said lamely.  “I just thought you might want
to register a kick.”

“About what?” asked the imperturbable Smoke.

Smoke’s mates were now smiling broadly.  His captain could have killed
him, and I doubt not that blood would have flowed had not Maud Brewster
been present.  For that matter, it was her presence which enabled Smoke
to act as he did.  He was too discreet and cautious a man to incur Wolf
Larsen’s anger at a time when that anger could be expressed in terms
stronger than words.  I was in fear that a struggle might take place, but
a cry from the helmsman made it easy for the situation to save itself.

“Smoke ho!” the cry came down the open companion-way.

“How’s it bear?” Wolf Larsen called up.

“Dead astern, sir.”

“Maybe it’s a Russian,” suggested Latimer.

His words brought anxiety into the faces of the other hunters.  A Russian
could mean but one thing—a cruiser.  The hunters, never more than roughly
aware of the position of the ship, nevertheless knew that we were close
to the boundaries of the forbidden sea, while Wolf Larsen’s record as a
poacher was notorious.  All eyes centred upon him.

“We’re dead safe,” he assured them with a laugh.  “No salt mines this
time, Smoke.  But I’ll tell you what—I’ll lay odds of five to one it’s
the _Macedonia_.”

No one accepted his offer, and he went on: “In which event, I’ll lay ten
to one there’s trouble breezing up.”

“No, thank you,” Latimer spoke up.  “I don’t object to losing my money,
but I like to get a run for it anyway.  There never was a time when there
wasn’t trouble when you and that brother of yours got together, and I’ll
lay twenty to one on that.”

A general smile followed, in which Wolf Larsen joined, and the dinner
went on smoothly, thanks to me, for he treated me abominably the rest of
the meal, sneering at me and patronizing me till I was all a-tremble with
suppressed rage.  Yet I knew I must control myself for Maud Brewster’s
sake, and I received my reward when her eyes caught mine for a fleeting
second, and they said, as distinctly as if she spoke, “Be brave, be
brave.”

We left the table to go on deck, for a steamer was a welcome break in the
monotony of the sea on which we floated, while the conviction that it was
Death Larsen and the _Macedonia_ added to the excitement.  The stiff
breeze and heavy sea which had sprung up the previous afternoon had been
moderating all morning, so that it was now possible to lower the boats
for an afternoon’s hunt.  The hunting promised to be profitable.  We had
sailed since daylight across a sea barren of seals, and were now running
into the herd.

The smoke was still miles astern, but overhauling us rapidly, when we
lowered our boats.  They spread out and struck a northerly course across
the ocean.  Now and again we saw a sail lower, heard the reports of the
shot-guns, and saw the sail go up again.  The seals were thick, the wind
was dying away; everything favoured a big catch.  As we ran off to get
our leeward position of the last lee boat, we found the ocean fairly
carpeted with sleeping seals.  They were all about us, thicker than I had
ever seen them before, in twos and threes and bunches, stretched full
length on the surface and sleeping for all the world like so many lazy
young dogs.

Under the approaching smoke the hull and upper-works of a steamer were
growing larger.  It was the _Macedonia_.  I read her name through the
glasses as she passed by scarcely a mile to starboard.  Wolf Larsen
looked savagely at the vessel, while Maud Brewster was curious.

“Where is the trouble you were so sure was breezing up, Captain Larsen?”
she asked gaily.

He glanced at her, a moment’s amusement softening his features.

“What did you expect?  That they’d come aboard and cut our throats?”

“Something like that,” she confessed.  “You understand, seal-hunters are
so new and strange to me that I am quite ready to expect anything.”

He nodded his head.  “Quite right, quite right.  Your error is that you
failed to expect the worst.”

“Why, what can be worse than cutting our throats?” she asked, with pretty
naïve surprise.

“Cutting our purses,” he answered.  “Man is so made these days that his
capacity for living is determined by the money he possesses.”

“’Who steals my purse steals trash,’” she quoted.

“Who steals my purse steals my right to live,” was the reply, “old saws
to the contrary.  For he steals my bread and meat and bed, and in so
doing imperils my life.  There are not enough soup-kitchens and
bread-lines to go around, you know, and when men have nothing in their
purses they usually die, and die miserably—unless they are able to fill
their purses pretty speedily.”

“But I fail to see that this steamer has any designs on your purse.”

“Wait and you will see,” he answered grimly.

We did not have long to wait.  Having passed several miles beyond our
line of boats, the _Macedonia_ proceeded to lower her own.  We knew she
carried fourteen boats to our five (we were one short through the
desertion of Wainwright), and she began dropping them far to leeward of
our last boat, continued dropping them athwart our course, and finished
dropping them far to windward of our first weather boat.  The hunting,
for us, was spoiled.  There were no seals behind us, and ahead of us the
line of fourteen boats, like a huge broom, swept the herd before it.

Our boats hunted across the two or three miles of water between them and
the point where the _Macedonia’s_ had been dropped, and then headed for
home.  The wind had fallen to a whisper, the ocean was growing calmer and
calmer, and this, coupled with the presence of the great herd, made a
perfect hunting day—one of the two or three days to be encountered in the
whole of a lucky season.  An angry lot of men, boat-pullers and steerers
as well as hunters, swarmed over our side.  Each man felt that he had
been robbed; and the boats were hoisted in amid curses, which, if curses
had power, would have settled Death Larsen for all eternity—“Dead and
damned for a dozen iv eternities,” commented Louis, his eyes twinkling up
at me as he rested from hauling taut the lashings of his boat.

“Listen to them, and find if it is hard to discover the most vital thing
in their souls,” said Wolf Larsen.  “Faith? and love? and high ideals?
The good? the beautiful? the true?”

“Their innate sense of right has been violated,” Maud Brewster said,
joining the conversation.

She was standing a dozen feet away, one hand resting on the main-shrouds
and her body swaying gently to the slight roll of the ship.  She had not
raised her voice, and yet I was struck by its clear and bell-like tone.
Ah, it was sweet in my ears!  I scarcely dared look at her just then, for
the fear of betraying myself.  A boy’s cap was perched on her head, and
her hair, light brown and arranged in a loose and fluffy order that
caught the sun, seemed an aureole about the delicate oval of her face.
She was positively bewitching, and, withal, sweetly spirituelle, if not
saintly.  All my old-time marvel at life returned to me at sight of this
splendid incarnation of it, and Wolf Larsen’s cold explanation of life
and its meaning was truly ridiculous and laughable.

“A sentimentalist,” he sneered, “like Mr. Van Weyden.  Those men are
cursing because their desires have been outraged.  That is all.  What
desires?  The desires for the good grub and soft beds ashore which a
handsome pay-day brings them—the women and the drink, the gorging and the
beastliness which so truly expresses them, the best that is in them,
their highest aspirations, their ideals, if you please.  The exhibition
they make of their feelings is not a touching sight, yet it shows how
deeply they have been touched, how deeply their purses have been touched,
for to lay hands on their purses is to lay hands on their souls.”

“’You hardly behave as if your purse had been touched,” she said,
smilingly.

“Then it so happens that I am behaving differently, for my purse and my
soul have both been touched.  At the current price of skins in the London
market, and based on a fair estimate of what the afternoon’s catch would
have been had not the _Macedonia_ hogged it, the _Ghost_ has lost about
fifteen hundred dollars’ worth of skins.”

“You speak so calmly—” she began.

“But I do not feel calm; I could kill the man who robbed me,” he
interrupted.  “Yes, yes, I know, and that man my brother—more sentiment!
Bah!”

His face underwent a sudden change.  His voice was less harsh and wholly
sincere as he said:

“You must be happy, you sentimentalists, really and truly happy at
dreaming and finding things good, and, because you find some of them
good, feeling good yourself.  Now, tell me, you two, do you find me
good?”

“You are good to look upon—in a way,” I qualified.

“There are in you all powers for good,” was Maud Brewster’s answer.

“There you are!” he cried at her, half angrily.  “Your words are empty to
me.  There is nothing clear and sharp and definite about the thought you
have expressed.  You cannot pick it up in your two hands and look at it.
In point of fact, it is not a thought.  It is a feeling, a sentiment, a
something based upon illusion and not a product of the intellect at all.”

As he went on his voice again grew soft, and a confiding note came into
it.  “Do you know, I sometimes catch myself wishing that I, too, were
blind to the facts of life and only knew its fancies and illusions.
They’re wrong, all wrong, of course, and contrary to reason; but in the
face of them my reason tells me, wrong and most wrong, that to dream and
live illusions gives greater delight.  And after all, delight is the wage
for living.  Without delight, living is a worthless act.  To labour at
living and be unpaid is worse than to be dead.  He who delights the most
lives the most, and your dreams and unrealities are less disturbing to
you and more gratifying than are my facts to me.”

He shook his head slowly, pondering.

“I often doubt, I often doubt, the worthwhileness of reason.  Dreams must
be more substantial and satisfying.  Emotional delight is more filling
and lasting than intellectual delight; and, besides, you pay for your
moments of intellectual delight by having the blues.  Emotional delight
is followed by no more than jaded senses which speedily recuperate.  I
envy you, I envy you.”

He stopped abruptly, and then on his lips formed one of his strange
quizzical smiles, as he added:

“It’s from my brain I envy you, take notice, and not from my heart.  My
reason dictates it.  The envy is an intellectual product.  I am like a
sober man looking upon drunken men, and, greatly weary, wishing he, too,
were drunk.”

“Or like a wise man looking upon fools and wishing he, too, were a fool,”
I laughed.

“Quite so,” he said.  “You are a blessed, bankrupt pair of fools.  You
have no facts in your pocketbook.”

“Yet we spend as freely as you,” was Maud Brewster’s contribution.

“More freely, because it costs you nothing.”

“And because we draw upon eternity,” she retorted.

“Whether you do or think you do, it’s the same thing.  You spend what you
haven’t got, and in return you get greater value from spending what you
haven’t got than I get from spending what I have got, and what I have
sweated to get.”

“Why don’t you change the basis of your coinage, then?” she queried
teasingly.

He looked at her quickly, half-hopefully, and then said, all regretfully:
“Too late.  I’d like to, perhaps, but I can’t.  My pocketbook is stuffed
with the old coinage, and it’s a stubborn thing.  I can never bring
myself to recognize anything else as valid.”

He ceased speaking, and his gaze wandered absently past her and became
lost in the placid sea.  The old primal melancholy was strong upon him.
He was quivering to it.  He had reasoned himself into a spell of the
blues, and within few hours one could look for the devil within him to be
up and stirring.  I remembered Charley Furuseth, and knew this man’s
sadness as the penalty which the materialist ever pays for his
materialism.




CHAPTER XXV


“You’ve been on deck, Mr. Van Weyden,” Wolf Larsen said, the following
morning at the breakfast-table, “How do things look?”

“Clear enough,” I answered, glancing at the sunshine which streamed down
the open companion-way.  “Fair westerly breeze, with a promise of
stiffening, if Louis predicts correctly.”

He nodded his head in a pleased way.  “Any signs of fog?”

“Thick banks in the north and north-west.”

He nodded his head again, evincing even greater satisfaction than before.

“What of the _Macedonia_?”

“Not sighted,” I answered.

I could have sworn his face fell at the intelligence, but why he should
be disappointed I could not conceive.

I was soon to learn.  “Smoke ho!” came the hail from on deck, and his
face brightened.

“Good!” he exclaimed, and left the table at once to go on deck and into
the steerage, where the hunters were taking the first breakfast of their
exile.

Maud Brewster and I scarcely touched the food before us, gazing, instead,
in silent anxiety at each other, and listening to Wolf Larsen’s voice,
which easily penetrated the cabin through the intervening bulkhead.  He
spoke at length, and his conclusion was greeted with a wild roar of
cheers.  The bulkhead was too thick for us to hear what he said; but
whatever it was it affected the hunters strongly, for the cheering was
followed by loud exclamations and shouts of joy.

From the sounds on deck I knew that the sailors had been routed out and
were preparing to lower the boats.  Maud Brewster accompanied me on deck,
but I left her at the break of the poop, where she might watch the scene
and not be in it.  The sailors must have learned whatever project was on
hand, and the vim and snap they put into their work attested their
enthusiasm.  The hunters came trooping on deck with shot-guns and
ammunition-boxes, and, most unusual, their rifles.  The latter were
rarely taken in the boats, for a seal shot at long range with a rifle
invariably sank before a boat could reach it.  But each hunter this day
had his rifle and a large supply of cartridges.  I noticed they grinned
with satisfaction whenever they looked at the _Macedonia’s_ smoke, which
was rising higher and higher as she approached from the west.

The five boats went over the side with a rush, spread out like the ribs
of a fan, and set a northerly course, as on the preceding afternoon, for
us to follow.  I watched for some time, curiously, but there seemed
nothing extraordinary about their behaviour.  They lowered sails, shot
seals, and hoisted sails again, and continued on their way as I had
always seen them do.  The _Macedonia_ repeated her performance of
yesterday, “hogging” the sea by dropping her line of boats in advance of
ours and across our course.  Fourteen boats require a considerable spread
of ocean for comfortable hunting, and when she had completely lapped our
line she continued steaming into the north-east, dropping more boats as
she went.

“What’s up?” I asked Wolf Larsen, unable longer to keep my curiosity in
check.

“Never mind what’s up,” he answered gruffly.  “You won’t be a thousand
years in finding out, and in the meantime just pray for plenty of wind.”

“Oh, well, I don’t mind telling you,” he said the next moment.  “I’m
going to give that brother of mine a taste of his own medicine.  In
short, I’m going to play the hog myself, and not for one day, but for the
rest of the season,—if we’re in luck.”

“And if we’re not?” I queried.

“Not to be considered,” he laughed.  “We simply must be in luck, or it’s
all up with us.”

He had the wheel at the time, and I went forward to my hospital in the
forecastle, where lay the two crippled men, Nilson and Thomas Mugridge.
Nilson was as cheerful as could be expected, for his broken leg was
knitting nicely; but the Cockney was desperately melancholy, and I was
aware of a great sympathy for the unfortunate creature.  And the marvel
of it was that still he lived and clung to life.  The brutal years had
reduced his meagre body to splintered wreckage, and yet the spark of life
within burned brightly as ever.

“With an artificial foot—and they make excellent ones—you will be
stumping ships’ galleys to the end of time,” I assured him jovially.

But his answer was serious, nay, solemn.  “I don’t know about wot you
s’y, Mr. Van W’yden, but I do know I’ll never rest ’appy till I see that
’ell-’ound bloody well dead.  ’E cawn’t live as long as me.  ’E’s got no
right to live, an’ as the Good Word puts it, ‘’E shall shorely die,’ an’
I s’y, ‘Amen, an’ damn soon at that.’”

When I returned on deck I found Wolf Larsen steering mainly with one
hand, while with the other hand he held the marine glasses and studied
the situation of the boats, paying particular attention to the position
of the _Macedonia_.  The only change noticeable in our boats was that
they had hauled close on the wind and were heading several points west of
north.  Still, I could not see the expediency of the manœuvre, for the
free sea was still intercepted by the _Macedonia’s_ five weather boats,
which, in turn, had hauled close on the wind.  Thus they slowly diverged
toward the west, drawing farther away from the remainder of the boats in
their line.  Our boats were rowing as well as sailing.  Even the hunters
were pulling, and with three pairs of oars in the water they rapidly
overhauled what I may appropriately term the enemy.

The smoke of the _Macedonia_ had dwindled to a dim blot on the
north-eastern horizon.  Of the steamer herself nothing was to be seen.
We had been loafing along, till now, our sails shaking half the time and
spilling the wind; and twice, for short periods, we had been hove to.
But there was no more loafing.  Sheets were trimmed, and Wolf Larsen
proceeded to put the _Ghost_ through her paces.  We ran past our line of
boats and bore down upon the first weather boat of the other line.

“Down that flying jib, Mr. Van Weyden,” Wolf Larsen commanded.  “And
stand by to back over the jibs.”

I ran forward and had the downhaul of the flying jib all in and fast as
we slipped by the boat a hundred feet to leeward.  The three men in it
gazed at us suspiciously.  They had been hogging the sea, and they knew
Wolf Larsen, by reputation at any rate.  I noted that the hunter, a huge
Scandinavian sitting in the bow, held his rifle, ready to hand, across
his knees.  It should have been in its proper place in the rack.  When
they came opposite our stern, Wolf Larsen greeted them with a wave of the
hand, and cried:

“Come on board and have a ’gam’!”

“To gam,” among the sealing-schooners, is a substitute for the verbs “to
visit,” “to gossip.”  It expresses the garrulity of the sea, and is a
pleasant break in the monotony of the life.

The _Ghost_ swung around into the wind, and I finished my work forward in
time to run aft and lend a hand with the mainsheet.

“You will please stay on deck, Miss Brewster,” Wolf Larsen said, as he
started forward to meet his guest.  “And you too, Mr. Van Weyden.”

The boat had lowered its sail and run alongside.  The hunter, golden
bearded like a sea-king, came over the rail and dropped on deck.  But his
hugeness could not quite overcome his apprehensiveness.  Doubt and
distrust showed strongly in his face.  It was a transparent face, for all
of its hairy shield, and advertised instant relief when he glanced from
Wolf Larsen to me, noted that there was only the pair of us, and then
glanced over his own two men who had joined him.  Surely he had little
reason to be afraid.  He towered like a Goliath above Wolf Larsen.  He
must have measured six feet eight or nine inches in stature, and I
subsequently learned his weight—240 pounds.  And there was no fat about
him.  It was all bone and muscle.

A return of apprehension was apparent when, at the top of the
companion-way, Wolf Larsen invited him below.  But he reassured himself
with a glance down at his host—a big man himself but dwarfed by the
propinquity of the giant.  So all hesitancy vanished, and the pair
descended into the cabin.  In the meantime, his two men, as was the wont
of visiting sailors, had gone forward into the forecastle to do some
visiting themselves.

Suddenly, from the cabin came a great, choking bellow, followed by all
the sounds of a furious struggle.  It was the leopard and the lion, and
the lion made all the noise.  Wolf Larsen was the leopard.

“You see the sacredness of our hospitality,” I said bitterly to Maud
Brewster.

She nodded her head that she heard, and I noted in her face the signs of
the same sickness at sight or sound of violent struggle from which I had
suffered so severely during my first weeks on the _Ghost_.

“Wouldn’t it be better if you went forward, say by the steerage
companion-way, until it is over?” I suggested.

She shook her head and gazed at me pitifully.  She was not frightened,
but appalled, rather, at the human animality of it.

“You will understand,” I took advantage of the opportunity to say,
“whatever part I take in what is going on and what is to come, that I am
compelled to take it—if you and I are ever to get out of this scrape with
our lives.”

“It is not nice—for me,” I added.

“I understand,” she said, in a weak, far-away voice, and her eyes showed
me that she did understand.

The sounds from below soon died away.  Then Wolf Larsen came alone on
deck.  There was a slight flush under his bronze, but otherwise he bore
no signs of the battle.

“Send those two men aft, Mr. Van Weyden,” he said.

I obeyed, and a minute or two later they stood before him.  “Hoist in
your boat,” he said to them.  “Your hunter’s decided to stay aboard
awhile and doesn’t want it pounding alongside.”

“Hoist in your boat, I said,” he repeated, this time in sharper tones as
they hesitated to do his bidding.

“Who knows? you may have to sail with me for a time,” he said, quite
softly, with a silken threat that belied the softness, as they moved
slowly to comply, “and we might as well start with a friendly
understanding.  Lively now!  Death Larsen makes you jump better than
that, and you know it!”

Their movements perceptibly quickened under his coaching, and as the boat
swung inboard I was sent forward to let go the jibs.  Wolf Larsen, at the
wheel, directed the _Ghost_ after the _Macedonia’s_ second weather boat.

Under way, and with nothing for the time being to do, I turned my
attention to the situation of the boats.  The _Macedonia’s_ third weather
boat was being attacked by two of ours, the fourth by our remaining
three; and the fifth, turn about, was taking a hand in the defence of its
nearest mate.  The fight had opened at long distance, and the rifles were
cracking steadily.  A quick, snappy sea was being kicked up by the wind,
a condition which prevented fine shooting; and now and again, as we drew
closer, we could see the bullets zip-zipping from wave to wave.

The boat we were pursuing had squared away and was running before the
wind to escape us, and, in the course of its flight, to take part in
repulsing our general boat attack.

Attending to sheets and tacks now left me little time to see what was
taking place, but I happened to be on the poop when Wolf Larsen ordered
the two strange sailors forward and into the forecastle.  They went
sullenly, but they went.  He next ordered Miss Brewster below, and smiled
at the instant horror that leapt into her eyes.

“You’ll find nothing gruesome down there,” he said, “only an unhurt man
securely made fast to the ring-bolts.  Bullets are liable to come aboard,
and I don’t want you killed, you know.”

Even as he spoke, a bullet was deflected by a brass-capped spoke of the
wheel between his hands and screeched off through the air to windward.

“You see,” he said to her; and then to me, “Mr. Van Weyden, will you take
the wheel?”

Maud Brewster had stepped inside the companion-way so that only her head
was exposed.  Wolf Larsen had procured a rifle and was throwing a
cartridge into the barrel.  I begged her with my eyes to go below, but
she smiled and said:

“We may be feeble land-creatures without legs, but we can show Captain
Larsen that we are at least as brave as he.”

He gave her a quick look of admiration.

“I like you a hundred per cent. better for that,” he said.  “Books, and
brains, and bravery.  You are well-rounded, a blue-stocking fit to be the
wife of a pirate chief.  Ahem, we’ll discuss that later,” he smiled, as a
bullet struck solidly into the cabin wall.

I saw his eyes flash golden as he spoke, and I saw the terror mount in
her own.

“We are braver,” I hastened to say.  “At least, speaking for myself, I
know I am braver than Captain Larsen.”

It was I who was now favoured by a quick look.  He was wondering if I
were making fun of him.  I put three or four spokes over to counteract a
sheer toward the wind on the part of the _Ghost_, and then steadied her.
Wolf Larsen was still waiting an explanation, and I pointed down to my
knees.

“You will observe there,” I said, “a slight trembling.  It is because I
am afraid, the flesh is afraid; and I am afraid in my mind because I do
not wish to die.  But my spirit masters the trembling flesh and the
qualms of the mind.  I am more than brave.  I am courageous.  Your flesh
is not afraid.  You are not afraid.  On the one hand, it costs you
nothing to encounter danger; on the other hand, it even gives you
delight.  You enjoy it.  You may be unafraid, Mr. Larsen, but you must
grant that the bravery is mine.”

“You’re right,” he acknowledged at once.  “I never thought of it in that
way before.  But is the opposite true?  If you are braver than I, am I
more cowardly than you?”

We both laughed at the absurdity, and he dropped down to the deck and
rested his rifle across the rail.  The bullets we had received had
travelled nearly a mile, but by now we had cut that distance in half.  He
fired three careful shots.  The first struck fifty feet to windward of
the boat, the second alongside; and at the third the boat-steerer let
loose his steering-oar and crumpled up in the bottom of the boat.

“I guess that’ll fix them,” Wolf Larsen said, rising to his feet.  “I
couldn’t afford to let the hunter have it, and there is a chance the
boat-puller doesn’t know how to steer.  In which case, the hunter cannot
steer and shoot at the same time.”

His reasoning was justified, for the boat rushed at once into the wind
and the hunter sprang aft to take the boat-steerer’s place.  There was no
more shooting, though the rifles were still cracking merrily from the
other boats.

The hunter had managed to get the boat before the wind again, but we ran
down upon it, going at least two feet to its one.  A hundred yards away,
I saw the boat-puller pass a rifle to the hunter.  Wolf Larsen went
amidships and took the coil of the throat-halyards from its pin.  Then he
peered over the rail with levelled rifle.  Twice I saw the hunter let go
the steering-oar with one hand, reach for his rifle, and hesitate.  We
were now alongside and foaming past.

“Here, you!” Wolf Larsen cried suddenly to the boat-puller.  “Take a
turn!”

At the same time he flung the coil of rope.  It struck fairly, nearly
knocking the man over, but he did not obey.  Instead, he looked to his
hunter for orders.  The hunter, in turn, was in a quandary.  His rifle
was between his knees, but if he let go the steering-oar in order to
shoot, the boat would sweep around and collide with the schooner.  Also
he saw Wolf Larsen’s rifle bearing upon him and knew he would be shot ere
he could get his rifle into play.

“Take a turn,” he said quietly to the man.

The boat-puller obeyed, taking a turn around the little forward thwart
and paying the line as it jerked taut.  The boat sheered out with a rush,
and the hunter steadied it to a parallel course some twenty feet from the
side of the _Ghost_.

“Now, get that sail down and come alongside!” Wolf Larsen ordered.

He never let go his rifle, even passing down the tackles with one hand.
When they were fast, bow and stern, and the two uninjured men prepared to
come aboard, the hunter picked up his rifle as if to place it in a secure
position.

“Drop it!” Wolf Larsen cried, and the hunter dropped it as though it were
hot and had burned him.

Once aboard, the two prisoners hoisted in the boat and under Wolf
Larsen’s direction carried the wounded boat-steerer down into the
forecastle.

“If our five boats do as well as you and I have done, we’ll have a pretty
full crew,” Wolf Larsen said to me.

“The man you shot—he is—I hope?” Maud Brewster quavered.

“In the shoulder,” he answered.  “Nothing serious, Mr. Van Weyden will
pull him around as good as ever in three or four weeks.”

“But he won’t pull those chaps around, from the look of it,” he added,
pointing at the _Macedonia’s_ third boat, for which I had been steering
and which was now nearly abreast of us.  “That’s Horner’s and Smoke’s
work.  I told them we wanted live men, not carcasses.  But the joy of
shooting to hit is a most compelling thing, when once you’ve learned how
to shoot.  Ever experienced it, Mr. Van Weyden?”

I shook my head and regarded their work.  It had indeed been bloody, for
they had drawn off and joined our other three boats in the attack on the
remaining two of the enemy.  The deserted boat was in the trough of the
sea, rolling drunkenly across each comber, its loose spritsail out at
right angles to it and fluttering and flapping in the wind.  The hunter
and boat-puller were both lying awkwardly in the bottom, but the
boat-steerer lay across the gunwale, half in and half out, his arms
trailing in the water and his head rolling from side to side.

“Don’t look, Miss Brewster, please don’t look,” I had begged of her, and
I was glad that she had minded me and been spared the sight.

“Head right into the bunch, Mr. Van Weyden,” was Wolf Larsen’s command.

As we drew nearer, the firing ceased, and we saw that the fight was over.
The remaining two boats had been captured by our five, and the seven were
grouped together, waiting to be picked up.

“Look at that!” I cried involuntarily, pointing to the north-east.

The blot of smoke which indicated the _Macedonia’s_ position had
reappeared.

“Yes, I’ve been watching it,” was Wolf Larsen’s calm reply.  He measured
the distance away to the fog-bank, and for an instant paused to feel the
weight of the wind on his cheek.  “We’ll make it, I think; but you can
depend upon it that blessed brother of mine has twigged our little game
and is just a-humping for us.  Ah, look at that!”

The blot of smoke had suddenly grown larger, and it was very black.

“I’ll beat you out, though, brother mine,” he chuckled.  “I’ll beat you
out, and I hope you no worse than that you rack your old engines into
scrap.”

When we hove to, a hasty though orderly confusion reigned.  The boats
came aboard from every side at once.  As fast as the prisoners came over
the rail they were marshalled forward to the forecastle by our hunters,
while our sailors hoisted in the boats, pell-mell, dropping them anywhere
upon the deck and not stopping to lash them.  We were already under way,
all sails set and drawing, and the sheets being slacked off for a wind
abeam, as the last boat lifted clear of the water and swung in the
tackles.

There was need for haste.  The _Macedonia_, belching the blackest of
smoke from her funnel, was charging down upon us from out of the
north-east.  Neglecting the boats that remained to her, she had altered
her course so as to anticipate ours.  She was not running straight for
us, but ahead of us.  Our courses were converging like the sides of an
angle, the vertex of which was at the edge of the fog-bank.  It was
there, or not at all, that the _Macedonia_ could hope to catch us.  The
hope for the _Ghost_ lay in that she should pass that point before the
_Macedonia_ arrived at it.

Wolf Larsen was steering, his eyes glistening and snapping as they dwelt
upon and leaped from detail to detail of the chase.  Now he studied the
sea to windward for signs of the wind slackening or freshening, now the
_Macedonia_; and again, his eyes roved over every sail, and he gave
commands to slack a sheet here a trifle, to come in on one there a
trifle, till he was drawing out of the _Ghost_ the last bit of speed she
possessed.  All feuds and grudges were forgotten, and I was surprised at
the alacrity with which the men who had so long endured his brutality
sprang to execute his orders.  Strange to say, the unfortunate Johnson
came into my mind as we lifted and surged and heeled along, and I was
aware of a regret that he was not alive and present; he had so loved the
_Ghost_ and delighted in her sailing powers.

“Better get your rifles, you fellows,” Wolf Larsen called to our hunters;
and the five men lined the lee rail, guns in hand, and waited.

The _Macedonia_ was now but a mile away, the black smoke pouring from her
funnel at a right angle, so madly she raced, pounding through the sea at
a seventeen-knot gait—“’Sky-hooting through the brine,” as Wolf Larsen
quoted while gazing at her.  We were not making more than nine knots, but
the fog-bank was very near.

A puff of smoke broke from the _Macedonia’s_ deck, we heard a heavy
report, and a round hole took form in the stretched canvas of our
mainsail.  They were shooting at us with one of the small cannon which
rumour had said they carried on board.  Our men, clustering amidships,
waved their hats and raised a derisive cheer.  Again there was a puff of
smoke and a loud report, this time the cannon-ball striking not more than
twenty feet astern and glancing twice from sea to sea to windward ere it
sank.

But there was no rifle-firing for the reason that all their hunters were
out in the boats or our prisoners.  When the two vessels were half-a-mile
apart, a third shot made another hole in our mainsail.  Then we entered
the fog.  It was about us, veiling and hiding us in its dense wet gauze.

The sudden transition was startling.  The moment before we had been
leaping through the sunshine, the clear sky above us, the sea breaking
and rolling wide to the horizon, and a ship, vomiting smoke and fire and
iron missiles, rushing madly upon us.  And at once, as in an instant’s
leap, the sun was blotted out, there was no sky, even our mastheads were
lost to view, and our horizon was such as tear-blinded eyes may see.  The
grey mist drove by us like a rain.  Every woollen filament of our
garments, every hair of our heads and faces, was jewelled with a crystal
globule.  The shrouds were wet with moisture; it dripped from our rigging
overhead; and on the underside of our booms drops of water took shape in
long swaying lines, which were detached and flung to the deck in mimic
showers at each surge of the schooner.  I was aware of a pent, stifled
feeling.  As the sounds of the ship thrusting herself through the waves
were hurled back upon us by the fog, so were one’s thoughts.  The mind
recoiled from contemplation of a world beyond this wet veil which wrapped
us around.  This was the world, the universe itself, its bounds so near
one felt impelled to reach out both arms and push them back.  It was
impossible, that the rest could be beyond these walls of grey.  The rest
was a dream, no more than the memory of a dream.

It was weird, strangely weird.  I looked at Maud Brewster and knew that
she was similarly affected.  Then I looked at Wolf Larsen, but there was
nothing subjective about his state of consciousness.  His whole concern
was with the immediate, objective present.  He still held the wheel, and
I felt that he was timing Time, reckoning the passage of the minutes with
each forward lunge and leeward roll of the _Ghost_.

“Go for’ard and hard alee without any noise,” he said to me in a low
voice.  “Clew up the topsails first.  Set men at all the sheets.  Let
there be no rattling of blocks, no sound of voices.  No noise,
understand, no noise.”

When all was ready, the word “hard-a-lee” was passed forward to me from
man to man; and the _Ghost_ heeled about on the port tack with
practically no noise at all.  And what little there was,—the slapping of
a few reef-points and the creaking of a sheave in a block or two,—was
ghostly under the hollow echoing pall in which we were swathed.

We had scarcely filled away, it seemed, when the fog thinned abruptly and
we were again in the sunshine, the wide-stretching sea breaking before us
to the sky-line.  But the ocean was bare.  No wrathful _Macedonia_ broke
its surface nor blackened the sky with her smoke.

Wolf Larsen at once squared away and ran down along the rim of the
fog-bank.  His trick was obvious.  He had entered the fog to windward of
the steamer, and while the steamer had blindly driven on into the fog in
the chance of catching him, he had come about and out of his shelter and
was now running down to re-enter to leeward.  Successful in this, the old
simile of the needle in the haystack would be mild indeed compared with
his brother’s chance of finding him.  He did not run long.  Jibing the
fore- and main-sails and setting the topsails again, we headed back into
the bank.  As we entered I could have sworn I saw a vague bulk emerging
to windward.  I looked quickly at Wolf Larsen.  Already we were ourselves
buried in the fog, but he nodded his head.  He, too, had seen it—the
_Macedonia_, guessing his manœuvre and failing by a moment in
anticipating it.  There was no doubt that we had escaped unseen.

“He can’t keep this up,” Wolf Larsen said.  “He’ll have to go back for
the rest of his boats.  Send a man to the wheel, Mr. Van Weyden, keep
this course for the present, and you might as well set the watches, for
we won’t do any lingering to-night.”

“I’d give five hundred dollars, though,” he added, “just to be aboard the
_Macedonia_ for five minutes, listening to my brother curse.”

“And now, Mr. Van Weyden,” he said to me when he had been relieved from
the wheel, “we must make these new-comers welcome.  Serve out plenty of
whisky to the hunters and see that a few bottles slip for’ard.  I’ll
wager every man Jack of them is over the side to-morrow, hunting for Wolf
Larsen as contentedly as ever they hunted for Death Larsen.”

“But won’t they escape as Wainwright did?” I asked.

He laughed shrewdly.  “Not as long as our old hunters have anything to
say about it.  I’m dividing amongst them a dollar a skin for all the
skins shot by our new hunters.  At least half of their enthusiasm to-day
was due to that.  Oh, no, there won’t be any escaping if they have
anything to say about it.  And now you’d better get for’ard to your
hospital duties.  There must be a full ward waiting for you.”




CHAPTER XXVI


Wolf Larsen took the distribution of the whisky off my hands, and the
bottles began to make their appearance while I worked over the fresh
batch of wounded men in the forecastle.  I had seen whisky drunk, such as
whisky-and-soda by the men of the clubs, but never as these men drank it,
from pannikins and mugs, and from the bottles—great brimming drinks, each
one of which was in itself a debauch.  But they did not stop at one or
two.  They drank and drank, and ever the bottles slipped forward and they
drank more.

Everybody drank; the wounded drank; Oofty-Oofty, who helped me, drank.
Only Louis refrained, no more than cautiously wetting his lips with the
liquor, though he joined in the revels with an abandon equal to that of
most of them.  It was a saturnalia.  In loud voices they shouted over the
day’s fighting, wrangled about details, or waxed affectionate and made
friends with the men whom they had fought.  Prisoners and captors
hiccoughed on one another’s shoulders, and swore mighty oaths of respect
and esteem.  They wept over the miseries of the past and over the
miseries yet to come under the iron rule of Wolf Larsen.  And all cursed
him and told terrible tales of his brutality.

It was a strange and frightful spectacle—the small, bunk-lined space, the
floor and walls leaping and lurching, the dim light, the swaying shadows
lengthening and fore-shortening monstrously, the thick air heavy with
smoke and the smell of bodies and iodoform, and the inflamed faces of the
men—half-men, I should call them.  I noted Oofty-Oofty, holding the end
of a bandage and looking upon the scene, his velvety and luminous eyes
glistening in the light like a deer’s eyes, and yet I knew the barbaric
devil that lurked in his breast and belied all the softness and
tenderness, almost womanly, of his face and form.  And I noticed the
boyish face of Harrison,—a good face once, but now a demon’s,—convulsed
with passion as he told the new-comers of the hell-ship they were in and
shrieked curses upon the head of Wolf Larsen.

Wolf Larsen it was, always Wolf Larsen, enslaver and tormentor of men, a
male Circe and these his swine, suffering brutes that grovelled before
him and revolted only in drunkenness and in secrecy.  And was I, too, one
of his swine? I thought.  And Maud Brewster?  No!  I ground my teeth in
my anger and determination till the man I was attending winced under my
hand and Oofty-Oofty looked at me with curiosity.  I felt endowed with a
sudden strength.  What of my new-found love, I was a giant.  I feared
nothing.  I would work my will through it all, in spite of Wolf Larsen
and of my own thirty-five bookish years.  All would be well.  I would
make it well.  And so, exalted, upborne by a sense of power, I turned my
back on the howling inferno and climbed to the deck, where the fog
drifted ghostly through the night and the air was sweet and pure and
quiet.

The steerage, where were two wounded hunters, was a repetition of the
forecastle, except that Wolf Larsen was not being cursed; and it was with
a great relief that I again emerged on deck and went aft to the cabin.
Supper was ready, and Wolf Larsen and Maud were waiting for me.

While all his ship was getting drunk as fast as it could, he remained
sober.  Not a drop of liquor passed his lips.  He did not dare it under
the circumstances, for he had only Louis and me to depend upon, and Louis
was even now at the wheel.  We were sailing on through the fog without a
look-out and without lights.  That Wolf Larsen had turned the liquor
loose among his men surprised me, but he evidently knew their psychology
and the best method of cementing in cordiality, what had begun in
bloodshed.

His victory over Death Larsen seemed to have had a remarkable effect upon
him.  The previous evening he had reasoned himself into the blues, and I
had been waiting momentarily for one of his characteristic outbursts.
Yet nothing had occurred, and he was now in splendid trim.  Possibly his
success in capturing so many hunters and boats had counteracted the
customary reaction.  At any rate, the blues were gone, and the blue
devils had not put in an appearance.  So I thought at the time; but, ah
me, little I knew him or knew that even then, perhaps, he was meditating
an outbreak more terrible than any I had seen.

As I say, he discovered himself in splendid trim when I entered the
cabin.  He had had no headaches for weeks, his eyes were clear blue as
the sky, his bronze was beautiful with perfect health; life swelled
through his veins in full and magnificent flood.  While waiting for me he
had engaged Maud in animated discussion.  Temptation was the topic they
had hit upon, and from the few words I heard I made out that he was
contending that temptation was temptation only when a man was seduced by
it and fell.

“For look you,” he was saying, “as I see it, a man does things because of
desire.  He has many desires.  He may desire to escape pain, or to enjoy
pleasure.  But whatever he does, he does because he desires to do it.”

“But suppose he desires to do two opposite things, neither of which will
permit him to do the other?” Maud interrupted.

“The very thing I was coming to,” he said.

“And between these two desires is just where the soul of the man is
manifest,” she went on.  “If it is a good soul, it will desire and do the
good action, and the contrary if it is a bad soul.  It is the soul that
decides.”

“Bosh and nonsense!” he exclaimed impatiently.  “It is the desire that
decides.  Here is a man who wants to, say, get drunk.  Also, he doesn’t
want to get drunk.  What does he do?  How does he do it?  He is a puppet.
He is the creature of his desires, and of the two desires he obeys the
strongest one, that is all.  His soul hasn’t anything to do with it.  How
can he be tempted to get drunk and refuse to get drunk?  If the desire to
remain sober prevails, it is because it is the strongest desire.
Temptation plays no part, unless—” he paused while grasping the new
thought which had come into his mind—“unless he is tempted to remain
sober.

“Ha! ha!” he laughed.  “What do you think of that, Mr. Van Weyden?”

“That both of you are hair-splitting,” I said.  “The man’s soul is his
desires.  Or, if you will, the sum of his desires is his soul.  Therein
you are both wrong.  You lay the stress upon the desire apart from the
soul, Miss Brewster lays the stress on the soul apart from the desire,
and in point of fact soul and desire are the same thing.

“However,” I continued, “Miss Brewster is right in contending that
temptation is temptation whether the man yield or overcome.  Fire is
fanned by the wind until it leaps up fiercely.  So is desire like fire.
It is fanned, as by a wind, by sight of the thing desired, or by a new
and luring description or comprehension of the thing desired.  There lies
the temptation.  It is the wind that fans the desire until it leaps up to
mastery.  That’s temptation.  It may not fan sufficiently to make the
desire overmastering, but in so far as it fans at all, that far is it
temptation.  And, as you say, it may tempt for good as well as for evil.”

I felt proud of myself as we sat down to the table.  My words had been
decisive.  At least they had put an end to the discussion.

But Wolf Larsen seemed voluble, prone to speech as I had never seen him
before.  It was as though he were bursting with pent energy which must
find an outlet somehow.  Almost immediately he launched into a discussion
on love.  As usual, his was the sheer materialistic side, and Maud’s was
the idealistic.  For myself, beyond a word or so of suggestion or
correction now and again, I took no part.

He was brilliant, but so was Maud, and for some time I lost the thread of
the conversation through studying her face as she talked.  It was a face
that rarely displayed colour, but to-night it was flushed and vivacious.
Her wit was playing keenly, and she was enjoying the tilt as much as Wolf
Larsen, and he was enjoying it hugely.  For some reason, though I know
not why in the argument, so utterly had I lost it in the contemplation of
one stray brown lock of Maud’s hair, he quoted from Iseult at Tintagel,
where she says:

   “Blessed am I beyond women even herein,
   That beyond all born women is my sin,
   And perfect my transgression.”

As he had read pessimism into Omar, so now he read triumph, stinging
triumph and exultation, into Swinburne’s lines.  And he read rightly, and
he read well.  He had hardly ceased reading when Louis put his head into
the companion-way and whispered down:

“Be easy, will ye?  The fog’s lifted, an’ ’tis the port light iv a
steamer that’s crossin’ our bow this blessed minute.”

Wolf Larsen sprang on deck, and so swiftly that by the time we followed
him he had pulled the steerage-slide over the drunken clamour and was on
his way forward to close the forecastle-scuttle.  The fog, though it
remained, had lifted high, where it obscured the stars and made the night
quite black.  Directly ahead of us I could see a bright red light and a
white light, and I could hear the pulsing of a steamer’s engines.  Beyond
a doubt it was the _Macedonia_.

Wolf Larsen had returned to the poop, and we stood in a silent group,
watching the lights rapidly cross our bow.

“Lucky for me he doesn’t carry a searchlight,” Wolf Larsen said.

“What if I should cry out loudly?” I queried in a whisper.

“It would be all up,” he answered.  “But have you thought upon what would
immediately happen?”

Before I had time to express any desire to know, he had me by the throat
with his gorilla grip, and by a faint quiver of the muscles—a hint, as it
were—he suggested to me the twist that would surely have broken my neck.
The next moment he had released me and we were gazing at the
_Macedonia’s_ lights.

“What if I should cry out?” Maud asked.

“I like you too well to hurt you,” he said softly—nay, there was a
tenderness and a caress in his voice that made me wince.

“But don’t do it, just the same, for I’d promptly break Mr. Van Weyden’s
neck.”

“Then she has my permission to cry out,” I said defiantly.

“I hardly think you’ll care to sacrifice the Dean of American Letters the
Second,” he sneered.

We spoke no more, though we had become too used to one another for the
silence to be awkward; and when the red light and the white had
disappeared we returned to the cabin to finish the interrupted supper.

Again they fell to quoting, and Maud gave Dowson’s “Impenitentia Ultima.”
She rendered it beautifully, but I watched not her, but Wolf Larsen.  I
was fascinated by the fascinated look he bent upon Maud.  He was quite
out of himself, and I noticed the unconscious movement of his lips as he
shaped word for word as fast as she uttered them.  He interrupted her
when she gave the lines:

   “And her eyes should be my light while the sun went out behind me,
   And the viols in her voice be the last sound in my ear.”

“There are viols in your voice,” he said bluntly, and his eyes flashed
their golden light.

I could have shouted with joy at her control.  She finished the
concluding stanza without faltering and then slowly guided the
conversation into less perilous channels.  And all the while I sat in a
half-daze, the drunken riot of the steerage breaking through the
bulkhead, the man I feared and the woman I loved talking on and on.  The
table was not cleared.  The man who had taken Mugridge’s place had
evidently joined his comrades in the forecastle.

If ever Wolf Larsen attained the summit of living, he attained it then.
From time to time I forsook my own thoughts to follow him, and I followed
in amaze, mastered for the moment by his remarkable intellect, under the
spell of his passion, for he was preaching the passion of revolt.  It was
inevitable that Milton’s Lucifer should be instanced, and the keenness
with which Wolf Larsen analysed and depicted the character was a
revelation of his stifled genius.  It reminded me of Taine, yet I knew
the man had never heard of that brilliant though dangerous thinker.

“He led a lost cause, and he was not afraid of God’s thunderbolts,” Wolf
Larsen was saying.  “Hurled into hell, he was unbeaten.  A third of God’s
angels he had led with him, and straightway he incited man to rebel
against God, and gained for himself and hell the major portion of all the
generations of man.  Why was he beaten out of heaven?  Because he was
less brave than God? less proud? less aspiring?  No!  A thousand times
no!  God was more powerful, as he said, Whom thunder hath made greater.
But Lucifer was a free spirit.  To serve was to suffocate.  He preferred
suffering in freedom to all the happiness of a comfortable servility.  He
did not care to serve God.  He cared to serve nothing.  He was no
figure-head.  He stood on his own legs.  He was an individual.”

“The first Anarchist,” Maud laughed, rising and preparing to withdraw to
her state-room.

“Then it is good to be an anarchist!” he cried.  He, too, had risen, and
he stood facing her, where she had paused at the door of her room, as he
went on:

               “‘Here at least
   We shall be free; the Almighty hath not built
   Here for his envy; will not drive us hence;
   Here we may reign secure; and in my choice
   To reign is worth ambition, though in hell:
   Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven.”

It was the defiant cry of a mighty spirit.  The cabin still rang with his
voice, as he stood there, swaying, his bronzed face shining, his head up
and dominant, and his eyes, golden and masculine, intensely masculine and
insistently soft, flashing upon Maud at the door.

Again that unnamable and unmistakable terror was in her eyes, and she
said, almost in a whisper, “You are Lucifer.”

The door closed and she was gone.  He stood staring after her for a
minute, then returned to himself and to me.

“I’ll relieve Louis at the wheel,” he said shortly, “and call upon you to
relieve at midnight.  Better turn in now and get some sleep.”

He pulled on a pair of mittens, put on his cap, and ascended the
companion-stairs, while I followed his suggestion by going to bed.  For
some unknown reason, prompted mysteriously, I did not undress, but lay
down fully clothed.  For a time I listened to the clamour in the steerage
and marvelled upon the love which had come to me; but my sleep on the
_Ghost_ had become most healthful and natural, and soon the songs and
cries died away, my eyes closed, and my consciousness sank down into the
half-death of slumber.

                                * * * * *

I knew not what had aroused me, but I found myself out of my bunk, on my
feet, wide awake, my soul vibrating to the warning of danger as it might
have thrilled to a trumpet call.  I threw open the door.  The cabin light
was burning low.  I saw Maud, my Maud, straining and struggling and
crushed in the embrace of Wolf Larsen’s arms.  I could see the vain beat
and flutter of her as she strove, pressing her face against his breast,
to escape from him.  All this I saw on the very instant of seeing and as
I sprang forward.

I struck him with my fist, on the face, as he raised his head, but it was
a puny blow.  He roared in a ferocious, animal-like way, and gave me a
shove with his hand.  It was only a shove, a flirt of the wrist, yet so
tremendous was his strength that I was hurled backward as from a
catapult.  I struck the door of the state-room which had formerly been
Mugridge’s, splintering and smashing the panels with the impact of my
body.  I struggled to my feet, with difficulty dragging myself clear of
the wrecked door, unaware of any hurt whatever.  I was conscious only of
an overmastering rage.  I think I, too, cried aloud, as I drew the knife
at my hip and sprang forward a second time.

But something had happened.  They were reeling apart.  I was close upon
him, my knife uplifted, but I withheld the blow.  I was puzzled by the
strangeness of it.  Maud was leaning against the wall, one hand out for
support; but he was staggering, his left hand pressed against his
forehead and covering his eyes, and with the right he was groping about
him in a dazed sort of way.  It struck against the wall, and his body
seemed to express a muscular and physical relief at the contact, as
though he had found his bearings, his location in space as well as
something against which to lean.

Then I saw red again.  All my wrongs and humiliations flashed upon me
with a dazzling brightness, all that I had suffered and others had
suffered at his hands, all the enormity of the man’s very existence.  I
sprang upon him, blindly, insanely, and drove the knife into his
shoulder.  I knew, then, that it was no more than a flesh wound,—I had
felt the steel grate on his shoulder-blade,—and I raised the knife to
strike at a more vital part.

But Maud had seen my first blow, and she cried, “Don’t!  Please don’t!”

I dropped my arm for a moment, and a moment only.  Again the knife was
raised, and Wolf Larsen would have surely died had she not stepped
between.  Her arms were around me, her hair was brushing my face.  My
pulse rushed up in an unwonted manner, yet my rage mounted with it.  She
looked me bravely in the eyes.

“For my sake,” she begged.

“I would kill him for your sake!” I cried, trying to free my arm without
hurting her.

“Hush!” she said, and laid her fingers lightly on my lips.  I could have
kissed them, had I dared, even then, in my rage, the touch of them was so
sweet, so very sweet.  “Please, please,” she pleaded, and she disarmed me
by the words, as I was to discover they would ever disarm me.

I stepped back, separating from her, and replaced the knife in its
sheath.  I looked at Wolf Larsen.  He still pressed his left hand against
his forehead.  It covered his eyes.  His head was bowed.  He seemed to
have grown limp.  His body was sagging at the hips, his great shoulders
were drooping and shrinking forward.

“Van Weyden!” he called hoarsely, and with a note of fright in his
voice.  “Oh, Van Weyden! where are you?”

I looked at Maud.  She did not speak, but nodded her head.

“Here I am,” I answered, stepping to his side.  “What is the matter?”

“Help me to a seat,” he said, in the same hoarse, frightened voice.

“I am a sick man; a very sick man, Hump,” he said, as he left my
sustaining grip and sank into a chair.

His head dropped forward on the table and was buried in his hands.  From
time to time it rocked back and forward as with pain.  Once, when he half
raised it, I saw the sweat standing in heavy drops on his forehead about
the roots of his hair.

“I am a sick man, a very sick man,” he repeated again, and yet once
again.

“What is the matter?” I asked, resting my hand on his shoulder.  “What
can I do for you?”

But he shook my hand off with an irritated movement, and for a long time
I stood by his side in silence.  Maud was looking on, her face awed and
frightened.  What had happened to him we could not imagine.

“Hump,” he said at last, “I must get into my bunk.  Lend me a hand.  I’ll
be all right in a little while.  It’s those damn headaches, I believe.  I
was afraid of them.  I had a feeling—no, I don’t know what I’m talking
about.  Help me into my bunk.”

But when I got him into his bunk he again buried his face in his hands,
covering his eyes, and as I turned to go I could hear him murmuring, “I
am a sick man, a very sick man.”

Maud looked at me inquiringly as I emerged.  I shook my head, saying:

“Something has happened to him.  What, I don’t know.  He is helpless, and
frightened, I imagine, for the first time in his life.  It must have
occurred before he received the knife-thrust, which made only a
superficial wound.  You must have seen what happened.”

She shook her head.  “I saw nothing.  It is just as mysterious to me.  He
suddenly released me and staggered away.  But what shall we do?  What
shall I do?”

“If you will wait, please, until I come back,” I answered.

I went on deck.  Louis was at the wheel.

“You may go for’ard and turn in,” I said, taking it from him.

He was quick to obey, and I found myself alone on the deck of the
_Ghost_.  As quietly as was possible, I clewed up the topsails, lowered
the flying jib and staysail, backed the jib over, and flattened the
mainsail.  Then I went below to Maud.  I placed my finger on my lips for
silence, and entered Wolf Larsen’s room.  He was in the same position in
which I had left him, and his head was rocking—almost writhing—from side
to side.

“Anything I can do for you?” I asked.

He made no reply at first, but on my repeating the question he answered,
“No, no; I’m all right.  Leave me alone till morning.”

But as I turned to go I noted that his head had resumed its rocking
motion.  Maud was waiting patiently for me, and I took notice, with a
thrill of joy, of the queenly poise of her head and her glorious, calm
eyes.  Calm and sure they were as her spirit itself.

“Will you trust yourself to me for a journey of six hundred miles or so?”
I asked.

“You mean—?” she asked, and I knew she had guessed aright.

“Yes, I mean just that,” I replied.  “There is nothing left for us but
the open boat.”

“For me, you mean,” she said.  “You are certainly as safe here as you
have been.”

“No, there is nothing left for us but the open boat,” I iterated stoutly.
“Will you please dress as warmly as you can, at once, and make into a
bundle whatever you wish to bring with you.”

“And make all haste,” I added, as she turned toward her state-room.

The lazarette was directly beneath the cabin, and, opening the trap-door
in the floor and carrying a candle with me, I dropped down and began
overhauling the ship’s stores.  I selected mainly from the canned goods,
and by the time I was ready, willing hands were extended from above to
receive what I passed up.

We worked in silence.  I helped myself also to blankets, mittens,
oilskins, caps, and such things, from the slop-chest.  It was no light
adventure, this trusting ourselves in a small boat to so raw and stormy a
sea, and it was imperative that we should guard ourselves against the
cold and wet.

We worked feverishly at carrying our plunder on deck and depositing it
amidships, so feverishly that Maud, whose strength was hardly a positive
quantity, had to give over, exhausted, and sit on the steps at the break
of the poop.  This did not serve to recover her, and she lay on her back,
on the hard deck, arms stretched out, and whole body relaxed.  It was a
trick I remembered of my sister, and I knew she would soon be herself
again.  I knew, also, that weapons would not come in amiss, and I
re-entered Wolf Larsen’s state-room to get his rifle and shot-gun.  I
spoke to him, but he made no answer, though his head was still rocking
from side to side and he was not asleep.

“Good-bye, Lucifer,” I whispered to myself as I softly closed the door.

Next to obtain was a stock of ammunition,—an easy matter, though I had to
enter the steerage companion-way to do it.  Here the hunters stored the
ammunition-boxes they carried in the boats, and here, but a few feet from
their noisy revels, I took possession of two boxes.

Next, to lower a boat.  Not so simple a task for one man.  Having cast
off the lashings, I hoisted first on the forward tackle, then on the aft,
till the boat cleared the rail, when I lowered away, one tackle and then
the other, for a couple of feet, till it hung snugly, above the water,
against the schooner’s side.  I made certain that it contained the proper
equipment of oars, rowlocks, and sail.  Water was a consideration, and I
robbed every boat aboard of its breaker.  As there were nine boats all
told, it meant that we should have plenty of water, and ballast as well,
though there was the chance that the boat would be overloaded, what of
the generous supply of other things I was taking.

While Maud was passing me the provisions and I was storing them in the
boat, a sailor came on deck from the forecastle.  He stood by the weather
rail for a time (we were lowering over the lee rail), and then sauntered
slowly amidships, where he again paused and stood facing the wind, with
his back toward us.  I could hear my heart beating as I crouched low in
the boat.  Maud had sunk down upon the deck and was, I knew, lying
motionless, her body in the shadow of the bulwark.  But the man never
turned, and, after stretching his arms above his head and yawning
audibly, he retraced his steps to the forecastle scuttle and disappeared.

A few minutes sufficed to finish the loading, and I lowered the boat into
the water.  As I helped Maud over the rail and felt her form close to
mine, it was all I could do to keep from crying out, “I love you!  I love
you!”  Truly Humphrey Van Weyden was at last in love, I thought, as her
fingers clung to mine while I lowered her down to the boat.  I held on to
the rail with one hand and supported her weight with the other, and I was
proud at the moment of the feat.  It was a strength I had not possessed a
few months before, on the day I said good-bye to Charley Furuseth and
started for San Francisco on the ill-fated _Martinez_.

As the boat ascended on a sea, her feet touched and I released her hands.
I cast off the tackles and leaped after her.  I had never rowed in my
life, but I put out the oars and at the expense of much effort got the
boat clear of the _Ghost_.  Then I experimented with the sail.  I had
seen the boat-steerers and hunters set their spritsails many times, yet
this was my first attempt.  What took them possibly two minutes took me
twenty, but in the end I succeeded in setting and trimming it, and with
the steering-oar in my hands hauled on the wind.

“There lies Japan,” I remarked, “straight before us.”

“Humphrey Van Weyden,” she said, “you are a brave man.”

“Nay,” I answered, “it is you who are a brave woman.”

We turned our heads, swayed by a common impulse to see the last of the
_Ghost_.  Her low hull lifted and rolled to windward on a sea; her canvas
loomed darkly in the night; her lashed wheel creaked as the rudder
kicked; then sight and sound of her faded away, and we were alone on the
dark sea.




CHAPTER XXVII


Day broke, grey and chill.  The boat was close-hauled on a fresh breeze
and the compass indicated that we were just making the course which would
bring us to Japan.  Though stoutly mittened, my fingers were cold, and
they pained from the grip on the steering-oar.  My feet were stinging
from the bite of the frost, and I hoped fervently that the sun would
shine.

Before me, in the bottom of the boat, lay Maud.  She, at least, was warm,
for under her and over her were thick blankets.  The top one I had drawn
over her face to shelter it from the night, so I could see nothing but
the vague shape of her, and her light-brown hair, escaped from the
covering and jewelled with moisture from the air.

Long I looked at her, dwelling upon that one visible bit of her as only a
man would who deemed it the most precious thing in the world.  So
insistent was my gaze that at last she stirred under the blankets, the
top fold was thrown back and she smiled out on me, her eyes yet heavy
with sleep.

“Good-morning, Mr. Van Weyden,” she said.  “Have you sighted land yet?”

“No,” I answered, “but we are approaching it at a rate of six miles an
hour.”

She made a _moue_ of disappointment.

“But that is equivalent to one hundred and forty-four miles in
twenty-four hours,” I added reassuringly.

Her face brightened.  “And how far have we to go?”

“Siberia lies off there,” I said, pointing to the west.  “But to the
south-west, some six hundred miles, is Japan.  If this wind should hold,
we’ll make it in five days.”

“And if it storms?  The boat could not live?”

She had a way of looking one in the eyes and demanding the truth, and
thus she looked at me as she asked the question.

“It would have to storm very hard,” I temporized.

“And if it storms very hard?”

I nodded my head.  “But we may be picked up any moment by a
sealing-schooner.  They are plentifully distributed over this part of the
ocean.”

“Why, you are chilled through!” she cried.  “Look!  You are shivering.
Don’t deny it; you are.  And here I have been lying warm as toast.”

“I don’t see that it would help matters if you, too, sat up and were
chilled,” I laughed.

“It will, though, when I learn to steer, which I certainly shall.”

She sat up and began making her simple toilet.  She shook down her hair,
and it fell about her in a brown cloud, hiding her face and shoulders.
Dear, damp brown hair!  I wanted to kiss it, to ripple it through my
fingers, to bury my face in it.  I gazed entranced, till the boat ran
into the wind and the flapping sail warned me I was not attending to my
duties.  Idealist and romanticist that I was and always had been in spite
of my analytical nature, yet I had failed till now in grasping much of
the physical characteristics of love.  The love of man and woman, I had
always held, was a sublimated something related to spirit, a spiritual
bond that linked and drew their souls together.  The bonds of the flesh
had little part in my cosmos of love.  But I was learning the sweet
lesson for myself that the soul transmuted itself, expressed itself,
through the flesh; that the sight and sense and touch of the loved one’s
hair was as much breath and voice and essence of the spirit as the light
that shone from the eyes and the thoughts that fell from the lips.  After
all, pure spirit was unknowable, a thing to be sensed and divined only;
nor could it express itself in terms of itself.  Jehovah was
anthropomorphic because he could address himself to the Jews only in
terms of their understanding; so he was conceived as in their own image,
as a cloud, a pillar of fire, a tangible, physical something which the
mind of the Israelites could grasp.

And so I gazed upon Maud’s light-brown hair, and loved it, and learned
more of love than all the poets and singers had taught me with all their
songs and sonnets.  She flung it back with a sudden adroit movement, and
her face emerged, smiling.

“Why don’t women wear their hair down always?” I asked.  “It is so much
more beautiful.”

“If it didn’t tangle so dreadfully,” she laughed.  “There!  I’ve lost one
of my precious hair-pins!”

I neglected the boat and had the sail spilling the wind again and again,
such was my delight in following her every movement as she searched
through the blankets for the pin.  I was surprised, and joyfully, that
she was so much the woman, and the display of each trait and mannerism
that was characteristically feminine gave me keener joy.  For I had been
elevating her too highly in my concepts of her, removing her too far from
the plane of the human, and too far from me.  I had been making of her a
creature goddess-like and unapproachable.  So I hailed with delight the
little traits that proclaimed her only woman after all, such as the toss
of the head which flung back the cloud of hair, and the search for the
pin.  She was woman, my kind, on my plane, and the delightful intimacy of
kind, of man and woman, was possible, as well as the reverence and awe in
which I knew I should always hold her.

She found the pin with an adorable little cry, and I turned my attention
more fully to my steering.  I proceeded to experiment, lashing and
wedging the steering-oar until the boat held on fairly well by the wind
without my assistance.  Occasionally it came up too close, or fell off
too freely; but it always recovered itself and in the main behaved
satisfactorily.

“And now we shall have breakfast,” I said.  “But first you must be more
warmly clad.”

I got out a heavy shirt, new from the slop-chest and made from blanket
goods.  I knew the kind, so thick and so close of texture that it could
resist the rain and not be soaked through after hours of wetting.  When
she had slipped this on over her head, I exchanged the boy’s cap she wore
for a man’s cap, large enough to cover her hair, and, when the flap was
turned down, to completely cover her neck and ears.  The effect was
charming.  Her face was of the sort that cannot but look well under all
circumstances.  Nothing could destroy its exquisite oval, its well-nigh
classic lines, its delicately stencilled brows, its large brown eyes,
clear-seeing and calm, gloriously calm.

A puff, slightly stronger than usual, struck us just then.  The boat was
caught as it obliquely crossed the crest of a wave.  It went over
suddenly, burying its gunwale level with the sea and shipping a bucketful
or so of water.  I was opening a can of tongue at the moment, and I
sprang to the sheet and cast it off just in time.  The sail flapped and
fluttered, and the boat paid off.  A few minutes of regulating sufficed
to put it on its course again, when I returned to the preparation of
breakfast.

“It does very well, it seems, though I am not versed in things nautical,”
she said, nodding her head with grave approval at my steering
contrivance.

“But it will serve only when we are sailing by the wind,” I explained.
“When running more freely, with the wind astern abeam, or on the quarter,
it will be necessary for me to steer.”

“I must say I don’t understand your technicalities,” she said, “but I do
your conclusion, and I don’t like it.  You cannot steer night and day and
for ever.  So I shall expect, after breakfast, to receive my first
lesson.  And then you shall lie down and sleep.  We’ll stand watches just
as they do on ships.”

“I don’t see how I am to teach you,” I made protest.  “I am just learning
for myself.  You little thought when you trusted yourself to me that I
had had no experience whatever with small boats.  This is the first time
I have ever been in one.”

“Then we’ll learn together, sir.  And since you’ve had a night’s start
you shall teach me what you have learned.  And now, breakfast.  My! this
air does give one an appetite!”

“No coffee,” I said regretfully, passing her buttered sea-biscuits and a
slice of canned tongue.  “And there will be no tea, no soups, nothing
hot, till we have made land somewhere, somehow.”

After the simple breakfast, capped with a cup of cold water, Maud took
her lesson in steering.  In teaching her I learned quite a deal myself,
though I was applying the knowledge already acquired by sailing the
_Ghost_ and by watching the boat-steerers sail the small boats.  She was
an apt pupil, and soon learned to keep the course, to luff in the puffs
and to cast off the sheet in an emergency.

Having grown tired, apparently, of the task, she relinquished the oar to
me.  I had folded up the blankets, but she now proceeded to spread them
out on the bottom.  When all was arranged snugly, she said:

“Now, sir, to bed.  And you shall sleep until luncheon.  Till
dinner-time,” she corrected, remembering the arrangement on the _Ghost_.

What could I do?  She insisted, and said, “Please, please,” whereupon I
turned the oar over to her and obeyed.  I experienced a positive sensuous
delight as I crawled into the bed she had made with her hands.  The calm
and control which were so much a part of her seemed to have been
communicated to the blankets, so that I was aware of a soft dreaminess
and content, and of an oval face and brown eyes framed in a fisherman’s
cap and tossing against a background now of grey cloud, now of grey sea,
and then I was aware that I had been asleep.

I looked at my watch.  It was one o’clock.  I had slept seven hours!  And
she had been steering seven hours!  When I took the steering-oar I had
first to unbend her cramped fingers.  Her modicum of strength had been
exhausted, and she was unable even to move from her position.  I was
compelled to let go the sheet while I helped her to the nest of blankets
and chafed her hands and arms.

“I am so tired,” she said, with a quick intake of the breath and a sigh,
drooping her head wearily.

But she straightened it the next moment.  “Now don’t scold, don’t you
dare scold,” she cried with mock defiance.

“I hope my face does not appear angry,” I answered seriously; “for I
assure you I am not in the least angry.”

“N-no,” she considered.  “It looks only reproachful.”

“Then it is an honest face, for it looks what I feel.  You were not fair
to yourself, nor to me.  How can I ever trust you again?”

She looked penitent.  “I’ll be good,” she said, as a naughty child might
say it.  “I promise—”

“To obey as a sailor would obey his captain?”

“Yes,” she answered.  “It was stupid of me, I know.”

“Then you must promise something else,” I ventured.

“Readily.”

“That you will not say, ‘Please, please,’ too often; for when you do you
are sure to override my authority.”

She laughed with amused appreciation.  She, too, had noticed the power of
the repeated “please.”

“It is a good word—” I began.

“But I must not overwork it,” she broke in.

But she laughed weakly, and her head drooped again.  I left the oar long
enough to tuck the blankets about her feet and to pull a single fold
across her face.  Alas! she was not strong.  I looked with misgiving
toward the south-west and thought of the six hundred miles of hardship
before us—ay, if it were no worse than hardship.  On this sea a storm
might blow up at any moment and destroy us.  And yet I was unafraid.  I
was without confidence in the future, extremely doubtful, and yet I felt
no underlying fear.  It must come right, it must come right, I repeated
to myself, over and over again.

The wind freshened in the afternoon, raising a stiffer sea and trying the
boat and me severely.  But the supply of food and the nine breakers of
water enabled the boat to stand up to the sea and wind, and I held on as
long as I dared.  Then I removed the sprit, tightly hauling down the peak
of the sail, and we raced along under what sailors call a leg-of-mutton.

Late in the afternoon I sighted a steamer’s smoke on the horizon to
leeward, and I knew it either for a Russian cruiser, or, more likely, the
_Macedonia_ still seeking the _Ghost_.  The sun had not shone all day,
and it had been bitter cold.  As night drew on, the clouds darkened and
the wind freshened, so that when Maud and I ate supper it was with our
mittens on and with me still steering and eating morsels between puffs.

By the time it was dark, wind and sea had become too strong for the boat,
and I reluctantly took in the sail and set about making a drag or
sea-anchor.  I had learned of the device from the talk of the hunters,
and it was a simple thing to manufacture.  Furling the sail and lashing
it securely about the mast, boom, sprit, and two pairs of spare oars, I
threw it overboard.  A line connected it with the bow, and as it floated
low in the water, practically unexposed to the wind, it drifted less
rapidly than the boat.  In consequence it held the boat bow on to the sea
and wind—the safest position in which to escape being swamped when the
sea is breaking into whitecaps.

“And now?” Maud asked cheerfully, when the task was accomplished and I
pulled on my mittens.

“And now we are no longer travelling toward Japan,” I answered.  “Our
drift is to the south-east, or south-south-east, at the rate of at least
two miles an hour.”

“That will be only twenty-four miles,” she urged, “if the wind remains
high all night.”

“Yes, and only one hundred and forty miles if it continues for three days
and nights.”

“But it won’t continue,” she said with easy confidence.  “It will turn
around and blow fair.”

“The sea is the great faithless one.”

“But the wind!” she retorted.  “I have heard you grow eloquent over the
brave trade-wind.”

“I wish I had thought to bring Wolf Larsen’s chronometer and sextant,” I
said, still gloomily.  “Sailing one direction, drifting another
direction, to say nothing of the set of the current in some third
direction, makes a resultant which dead reckoning can never calculate.
Before long we won’t know where we are by five hundred miles.”

Then I begged her pardon and promised I should not be disheartened any
more.  At her solicitation I let her take the watch till midnight,—it was
then nine o’clock, but I wrapped her in blankets and put an oilskin about
her before I lay down.  I slept only cat-naps.  The boat was leaping and
pounding as it fell over the crests, I could hear the seas rushing past,
and spray was continually being thrown aboard.  And still, it was not a
bad night, I mused—nothing to the nights I had been through on the
_Ghost_; nothing, perhaps, to the nights we should go through in this
cockle-shell.  Its planking was three-quarters of an inch thick.  Between
us and the bottom of the sea was less than an inch of wood.

And yet, I aver it, and I aver it again, I was unafraid.  The death which
Wolf Larsen and even Thomas Mugridge had made me fear, I no longer
feared.  The coming of Maud Brewster into my life seemed to have
transformed me.  After all, I thought, it is better and finer to love
than to be loved, if it makes something in life so worth while that one
is not loath to die for it.  I forget my own life in the love of another
life; and yet, such is the paradox, I never wanted so much to live as
right now when I place the least value upon my own life.  I never had so
much reason for living, was my concluding thought; and after that, until
I dozed, I contented myself with trying to pierce the darkness to where I
knew Maud crouched low in the stern-sheets, watchful of the foaming sea
and ready to call me on an instant’s notice.




CHAPTER XXVIII


There is no need of going into an extended recital of our suffering in
the small boat during the many days we were driven and drifted, here and
there, willy-nilly, across the ocean.  The high wind blew from the
north-west for twenty-four hours, when it fell calm, and in the night
sprang up from the south-west.  This was dead in our teeth, but I took in
the sea-anchor and set sail, hauling a course on the wind which took us
in a south-south-easterly direction.  It was an even choice between this
and the west-north-westerly course which the wind permitted; but the warm
airs of the south fanned my desire for a warmer sea and swayed my
decision.

In three hours—it was midnight, I well remember, and as dark as I had
ever seen it on the sea—the wind, still blowing out of the south-west,
rose furiously, and once again I was compelled to set the sea-anchor.

Day broke and found me wan-eyed and the ocean lashed white, the boat
pitching, almost on end, to its drag.  We were in imminent danger of
being swamped by the whitecaps.  As it was, spray and spume came aboard
in such quantities that I bailed without cessation.  The blankets were
soaking.  Everything was wet except Maud, and she, in oilskins, rubber
boots, and sou’wester, was dry, all but her face and hands and a stray
wisp of hair.  She relieved me at the bailing-hole from time to time, and
bravely she threw out the water and faced the storm.  All things are
relative.  It was no more than a stiff blow, but to us, fighting for life
in our frail craft, it was indeed a storm.

Cold and cheerless, the wind beating on our faces, the white seas roaring
by, we struggled through the day.  Night came, but neither of us slept.
Day came, and still the wind beat on our faces and the white seas roared
past.  By the second night Maud was falling asleep from exhaustion.  I
covered her with oilskins and a tarpaulin.  She was comparatively dry,
but she was numb with the cold.  I feared greatly that she might die in
the night; but day broke, cold and cheerless, with the same clouded sky
and beating wind and roaring seas.

I had had no sleep for forty-eight hours.  I was wet and chilled to the
marrow, till I felt more dead than alive.  My body was stiff from
exertion as well as from cold, and my aching muscles gave me the severest
torture whenever I used them, and I used them continually.  And all the
time we were being driven off into the north-east, directly away from
Japan and toward bleak Bering Sea.

And still we lived, and the boat lived, and the wind blew unabated.  In
fact, toward nightfall of the third day it increased a trifle and
something more.  The boat’s bow plunged under a crest, and we came
through quarter-full of water.  I bailed like a madman.  The liability of
shipping another such sea was enormously increased by the water that
weighed the boat down and robbed it of its buoyancy.  And another such
sea meant the end.  When I had the boat empty again I was forced to take
away the tarpaulin which covered Maud, in order that I might lash it down
across the bow.  It was well I did, for it covered the boat fully a third
of the way aft, and three times, in the next several hours, it flung off
the bulk of the down-rushing water when the bow shoved under the seas.

Maud’s condition was pitiable.  She sat crouched in the bottom of the
boat, her lips blue, her face grey and plainly showing the pain she
suffered.  But ever her eyes looked bravely at me, and ever her lips
uttered brave words.

The worst of the storm must have blown that night, though little I
noticed it.  I had succumbed and slept where I sat in the stern-sheets.
The morning of the fourth day found the wind diminished to a gentle
whisper, the sea dying down and the sun shining upon us.  Oh, the blessed
sun!  How we bathed our poor bodies in its delicious warmth, reviving
like bugs and crawling things after a storm.  We smiled again, said
amusing things, and waxed optimistic over our situation.  Yet it was, if
anything, worse than ever.  We were farther from Japan than the night we
left the _Ghost_.  Nor could I more than roughly guess our latitude and
longitude.  At a calculation of a two-mile drift per hour, during the
seventy and odd hours of the storm, we had been driven at least one
hundred and fifty miles to the north-east.  But was such calculated drift
correct?  For all I knew, it might have been four miles per hour instead
of two.  In which case we were another hundred and fifty miles to the
bad.

Where we were I did not know, though there was quite a likelihood that we
were in the vicinity of the _Ghost_.  There were seals about us, and I
was prepared to sight a sealing-schooner at any time.  We did sight one,
in the afternoon, when the north-west breeze had sprung up freshly once
more.  But the strange schooner lost itself on the sky-line and we alone
occupied the circle of the sea.

Came days of fog, when even Maud’s spirit drooped and there were no merry
words upon her lips; days of calm, when we floated on the lonely
immensity of sea, oppressed by its greatness and yet marvelling at the
miracle of tiny life, for we still lived and struggled to live; days of
sleet and wind and snow-squalls, when nothing could keep us warm; or days
of drizzling rain, when we filled our water-breakers from the drip of the
wet sail.

And ever I loved Maud with an increasing love.  She was so many-sided, so
many-mooded—“protean-mooded” I called her.  But I called her this, and
other and dearer things, in my thoughts only.  Though the declaration of
my love urged and trembled on my tongue a thousand times, I knew that it
was no time for such a declaration.  If for no other reason, it was no
time, when one was protecting and trying to save a woman, to ask that
woman for her love.  Delicate as was the situation, not alone in this but
in other ways, I flattered myself that I was able to deal delicately with
it; and also I flattered myself that by look or sign I gave no
advertisement of the love I felt for her.  We were like good comrades,
and we grew better comrades as the days went by.

One thing about her which surprised me was her lack of timidity and fear.
The terrible sea, the frail boat, the storms, the suffering, the
strangeness and isolation of the situation,—all that should have
frightened a robust woman,—seemed to make no impression upon her who had
known life only in its most sheltered and consummately artificial
aspects, and who was herself all fire and dew and mist, sublimated
spirit, all that was soft and tender and clinging in woman.  And yet I am
wrong.  She _was_ timid and afraid, but she possessed courage.  The flesh
and the qualms of the flesh she was heir to, but the flesh bore heavily
only on the flesh.  And she was spirit, first and always spirit,
etherealized essence of life, calm as her calm eyes, and sure of
permanence in the changing order of the universe.

Came days of storm, days and nights of storm, when the ocean menaced us
with its roaring whiteness, and the wind smote our struggling boat with a
Titan’s buffets.  And ever we were flung off, farther and farther, to the
north-east.  It was in such a storm, and the worst that we had
experienced, that I cast a weary glance to leeward, not in quest of
anything, but more from the weariness of facing the elemental strife, and
in mute appeal, almost, to the wrathful powers to cease and let us be.
What I saw I could not at first believe.  Days and nights of
sleeplessness and anxiety had doubtless turned my head.  I looked back at
Maud, to identify myself, as it were, in time and space.  The sight of
her dear wet cheeks, her flying hair, and her brave brown eyes convinced
me that my vision was still healthy.  Again I turned my face to leeward,
and again I saw the jutting promontory, black and high and naked, the
raging surf that broke about its base and beat its front high up with
spouting fountains, the black and forbidding coast-line running toward the
south-east and fringed with a tremendous scarf of white.

“Maud,” I said.  “Maud.”

She turned her head and beheld the sight.

“It cannot be Alaska!” she cried.

“Alas, no,” I answered, and asked, “Can you swim?”

She shook her head.

“Neither can I,” I said.  “So we must get ashore without swimming, in
some opening between the rocks through which we can drive the boat and
clamber out.  But we must be quick, most quick—and sure.”

I spoke with a confidence she knew I did not feel, for she looked at me
with that unfaltering gaze of hers and said:

“I have not thanked you yet for all you have done for me but—”

She hesitated, as if in doubt how best to word her gratitude.

“Well?” I said, brutally, for I was not quite pleased with her thanking
me.

“You might help me,” she smiled.

“To acknowledge your obligations before you die?  Not at all.  We are not
going to die.  We shall land on that island, and we shall be snug and
sheltered before the day is done.”

I spoke stoutly, but I did not believe a word.  Nor was I prompted to lie
through fear.  I felt no fear, though I was sure of death in that boiling
surge amongst the rocks which was rapidly growing nearer.  It was
impossible to hoist sail and claw off that shore.  The wind would
instantly capsize the boat; the seas would swamp it the moment it fell
into the trough; and, besides, the sail, lashed to the spare oars,
dragged in the sea ahead of us.

As I say, I was not afraid to meet my own death, there, a few hundred
yards to leeward; but I was appalled at the thought that Maud must die.
My cursed imagination saw her beaten and mangled against the rocks, and
it was too terrible.  I strove to compel myself to think we would make
the landing safely, and so I spoke, not what I believed, but what I
preferred to believe.

I recoiled before contemplation of that frightful death, and for a moment
I entertained the wild idea of seizing Maud in my arms and leaping
overboard.  Then I resolved to wait, and at the last moment, when we
entered on the final stretch, to take her in my arms and proclaim my
love, and, with her in my embrace, to make the desperate struggle and
die.

Instinctively we drew closer together in the bottom of the boat.  I felt
her mittened hand come out to mine.  And thus, without speech, we waited
the end.  We were not far off the line the wind made with the western
edge of the promontory, and I watched in the hope that some set of the
current or send of the sea would drift us past before we reached the
surf.

“We shall go clear,” I said, with a confidence which I knew deceived
neither of us.

“By God, we _will_ go clear!” I cried, five minutes later.

The oath left my lips in my excitement—the first, I do believe, in my
life, unless “trouble it,” an expletive of my youth, be accounted an
oath.

“I beg your pardon,” I said.

“You have convinced me of your sincerity,” she said, with a faint smile.
“I do know, now, that we shall go clear.”

I had seen a distant headland past the extreme edge of the promontory,
and as we looked we could see grow the intervening coastline of what was
evidently a deep cove.  At the same time there broke upon our ears a
continuous and mighty bellowing.  It partook of the magnitude and volume
of distant thunder, and it came to us directly from leeward, rising above
the crash of the surf and travelling directly in the teeth of the storm.
As we passed the point the whole cove burst upon our view, a half-moon of
white sandy beach upon which broke a huge surf, and which was covered
with myriads of seals.  It was from them that the great bellowing went
up.

“A rookery!” I cried.  “Now are we indeed saved.  There must be men and
cruisers to protect them from the seal-hunters.  Possibly there is a
station ashore.”

But as I studied the surf which beat upon the beach, I said, “Still bad,
but not so bad.  And now, if the gods be truly kind, we shall drift by
that next headland and come upon a perfectly sheltered beach, where we
may land without wetting our feet.”

And the gods were kind.  The first and second headlands were directly in
line with the south-west wind; but once around the second,—and we went
perilously near,—we picked up the third headland, still in line with the
wind and with the other two.  But the cove that intervened!  It
penetrated deep into the land, and the tide, setting in, drifted us under
the shelter of the point.  Here the sea was calm, save for a heavy but
smooth ground-swell, and I took in the sea-anchor and began to row.  From
the point the shore curved away, more and more to the south and west,
until at last it disclosed a cove within the cove, a little land-locked
harbour, the water level as a pond, broken only by tiny ripples where
vagrant breaths and wisps of the storm hurtled down from over the
frowning wall of rock that backed the beach a hundred feet inshore.

Here were no seals whatever.  The boat’s stern touched the hard shingle.
I sprang out, extending my hand to Maud.  The next moment she was beside
me.  As my fingers released hers, she clutched for my arm hastily.  At
the same moment I swayed, as about to fall to the sand.  This was the
startling effect of the cessation of motion.  We had been so long upon
the moving, rocking sea that the stable land was a shock to us.  We
expected the beach to lift up this way and that, and the rocky walls to
swing back and forth like the sides of a ship; and when we braced
ourselves, automatically, for these various expected movements, their
non-occurrence quite overcame our equilibrium.

“I really must sit down,” Maud said, with a nervous laugh and a dizzy
gesture, and forthwith she sat down on the sand.

I attended to making the boat secure and joined her.  Thus we landed on
Endeavour Island, as we came to it, land-sick from long custom of the
sea.




CHAPTER XXIX


“Fool!” I cried aloud in my vexation.

I had unloaded the boat and carried its contents high up on the beach,
where I had set about making a camp.  There was driftwood, though not
much, on the beach, and the sight of a coffee tin I had taken from the
_Ghost’s_ larder had given me the idea of a fire.

“Blithering idiot!” I was continuing.

But Maud said, “Tut, tut,” in gentle reproval, and then asked why I was a
blithering idiot.

“No matches,” I groaned.  “Not a match did I bring.  And now we shall
have no hot coffee, soup, tea, or anything!”

“Wasn’t it—er—Crusoe who rubbed sticks together?” she drawled.

“But I have read the personal narratives of a score of shipwrecked men
who tried, and tried in vain,” I answered.  “I remember Winters, a
newspaper fellow with an Alaskan and Siberian reputation.  Met him at the
Bibelot once, and he was telling us how he attempted to make a fire with
a couple of sticks.  It was most amusing.  He told it inimitably, but it
was the story of a failure.  I remember his conclusion, his black eyes
flashing as he said, ‘Gentlemen, the South Sea Islander may do it, the
Malay may do it, but take my word it’s beyond the white man.’”

“Oh, well, we’ve managed so far without it,” she said cheerfully.  “And
there’s no reason why we cannot still manage without it.”

“But think of the coffee!” I cried.  “It’s good coffee, too, I know.  I
took it from Larsen’s private stores.  And look at that good wood.”

I confess, I wanted the coffee badly; and I learned, not long afterward,
that the berry was likewise a little weakness of Maud’s.  Besides, we had
been so long on a cold diet that we were numb inside as well as out.
Anything warm would have been most gratifying.  But I complained no more
and set about making a tent of the sail for Maud.

I had looked upon it as a simple task, what of the oars, mast, boom, and
sprit, to say nothing of plenty of lines.  But as I was without
experience, and as every detail was an experiment and every successful
detail an invention, the day was well gone before her shelter was an
accomplished fact.  And then, that night, it rained, and she was flooded
out and driven back into the boat.

The next morning I dug a shallow ditch around the tent, and, an hour
later, a sudden gust of wind, whipping over the rocky wall behind us,
picked up the tent and smashed it down on the sand thirty yards away.

Maud laughed at my crestfallen expression, and I said, “As soon as the
wind abates I intend going in the boat to explore the island.  There must
be a station somewhere, and men.  And ships must visit the station.  Some
Government must protect all these seals.  But I wish to have you
comfortable before I start.”

“I should like to go with you,” was all she said.

“It would be better if you remained.  You have had enough of hardship.
It is a miracle that you have survived.  And it won’t be comfortable in
the boat rowing and sailing in this rainy weather.  What you need is
rest, and I should like you to remain and get it.”

Something suspiciously akin to moistness dimmed her beautiful eyes before
she dropped them and partly turned away her head.

“I should prefer going with you,” she said in a low voice, in which there
was just a hint of appeal.

“I might be able to help you a—” her voice broke,—“a little.  And if
anything should happen to you, think of me left here alone.”

“Oh, I intend being very careful,” I answered.  “And I shall not go so
far but what I can get back before night.  Yes, all said and done, I
think it vastly better for you to remain, and sleep, and rest and do
nothing.”

She turned and looked me in the eyes.  Her gaze was unfaltering, but
soft.

“Please, please,” she said, oh, so softly.

I stiffened myself to refuse, and shook my head.  Still she waited and
looked at me.  I tried to word my refusal, but wavered.  I saw the glad
light spring into her eyes and knew that I had lost.  It was impossible
to say no after that.

The wind died down in the afternoon, and we were prepared to start the
following morning.  There was no way of penetrating the island from our
cove, for the walls rose perpendicularly from the beach, and, on either
side of the cove, rose from the deep water.

Morning broke dull and grey, but calm, and I was awake early and had the
boat in readiness.

“Fool!  Imbecile!  Yahoo!” I shouted, when I thought it was meet to
arouse Maud; but this time I shouted in merriment as I danced about the
beach, bareheaded, in mock despair.

Her head appeared under the flap of the sail.

“What now?” she asked sleepily, and, withal, curiously.

“Coffee!” I cried.  “What do you say to a cup of coffee? hot coffee?
piping hot?”

“My!” she murmured, “you startled me, and you are cruel.  Here I have
been composing my soul to do without it, and here you are vexing me with
your vain suggestions.”

“Watch me,” I said.

From under clefts among the rocks I gathered a few dry sticks and chips.
These I whittled into shavings or split into kindling.  From my note-book
I tore out a page, and from the ammunition box took a shot-gun shell.
Removing the wads from the latter with my knife, I emptied the powder on
a flat rock.  Next I pried the primer, or cap, from the shell, and laid
it on the rock, in the midst of the scattered powder.  All was ready.
Maud still watched from the tent.  Holding the paper in my left hand, I
smashed down upon the cap with a rock held in my right.  There was a puff
of white smoke, a burst of flame, and the rough edge of the paper was
alight.

Maud clapped her hands gleefully.  “Prometheus!” she cried.

But I was too occupied to acknowledge her delight.  The feeble flame must
be cherished tenderly if it were to gather strength and live.  I fed it,
shaving by shaving, and sliver by sliver, till at last it was snapping
and crackling as it laid hold of the smaller chips and sticks.  To be
cast away on an island had not entered into my calculations, so we were
without a kettle or cooking utensils of any sort; but I made shift with
the tin used for bailing the boat, and later, as we consumed our supply
of canned goods, we accumulated quite an imposing array of cooking
vessels.

I boiled the water, but it was Maud who made the coffee.  And how good it
was!  My contribution was canned beef fried with crumbled sea-biscuit and
water.  The breakfast was a success, and we sat about the fire much
longer than enterprising explorers should have done, sipping the hot
black coffee and talking over our situation.

I was confident that we should find a station in some one of the coves,
for I knew that the rookeries of Bering Sea were thus guarded; but Maud
advanced the theory—to prepare me for disappointment, I do believe, if
disappointment were to come—that we had discovered an unknown rookery.
She was in very good spirits, however, and made quite merry in accepting
our plight as a grave one.

“If you are right,” I said, “then we must prepare to winter here.  Our
food will not last, but there are the seals.  They go away in the fall,
so I must soon begin to lay in a supply of meat.  Then there will be huts
to build and driftwood to gather.  Also we shall try out seal fat for
lighting purposes.  Altogether, we’ll have our hands full if we find the
island uninhabited.  Which we shall not, I know.”

But she was right.  We sailed with a beam wind along the shore, searching
the coves with our glasses and landing occasionally, without finding a
sign of human life.  Yet we learned that we were not the first who had
landed on Endeavour Island.  High up on the beach of the second cove from
ours, we discovered the splintered wreck of a boat—a sealer’s boat, for
the rowlocks were bound in sennit, a gun-rack was on the starboard side
of the bow, and in white letters was faintly visible _Gazelle_ No. 2.
The boat had lain there for a long time, for it was half filled with
sand, and the splintered wood had that weather-worn appearance due to
long exposure to the elements.  In the stern-sheets I found a rusty
ten-gauge shot-gun and a sailor’s sheath-knife broken short across and so
rusted as to be almost unrecognizable.

“They got away,” I said cheerfully; but I felt a sinking at the heart and
seemed to divine the presence of bleached bones somewhere on that beach.

I did not wish Maud’s spirits to be dampened by such a find, so I turned
seaward again with our boat and skirted the north-eastern point of the
island.  There were no beaches on the southern shore, and by early
afternoon we rounded the black promontory and completed the
circumnavigation of the island.  I estimated its circumference at
twenty-five miles, its width as varying from two to five miles; while my
most conservative calculation placed on its beaches two hundred thousand
seals.  The island was highest at its extreme south-western point, the
headlands and backbone diminishing regularly until the north-eastern
portion was only a few feet above the sea.  With the exception of our
little cove, the other beaches sloped gently back for a distance of
half-a-mile or so, into what I might call rocky meadows, with here and
there patches of moss and tundra grass.  Here the seals hauled out, and
the old bulls guarded their harems, while the young bulls hauled out by
themselves.

This brief description is all that Endeavour Island merits.  Damp and
soggy where it was not sharp and rocky, buffeted by storm winds and
lashed by the sea, with the air continually a-tremble with the bellowing
of two hundred thousand amphibians, it was a melancholy and miserable
sojourning-place.  Maud, who had prepared me for disappointment, and who
had been sprightly and vivacious all day, broke down as we landed in our
own little cove.  She strove bravely to hide it from me, but while I was
kindling another fire I knew she was stifling her sobs in the blankets
under the sail-tent.

It was my turn to be cheerful, and I played the part to the best of my
ability, and with such success that I brought the laughter back into her
dear eyes and song on her lips; for she sang to me before she went to an
early bed.  It was the first time I had heard her sing, and I lay by the
fire, listening and transported, for she was nothing if not an artist in
everything she did, and her voice, though not strong, was wonderfully
sweet and expressive.

I still slept in the boat, and I lay awake long that night, gazing up at
the first stars I had seen in many nights and pondering the situation.
Responsibility of this sort was a new thing to me.  Wolf Larsen had been
quite right.  I had stood on my father’s legs.  My lawyers and agents had
taken care of my money for me.  I had had no responsibilities at all.
Then, on the _Ghost_ I had learned to be responsible for myself.  And
now, for the first time in my life, I found myself responsible for some
one else.  And it was required of me that this should be the gravest of
responsibilities, for she was the one woman in the world—the one small
woman, as I loved to think of her.




CHAPTER XXX


No wonder we called it Endeavour Island.  For two weeks we toiled at
building a hut.  Maud insisted on helping, and I could have wept over her
bruised and bleeding hands.  And still, I was proud of her because of it.
There was something heroic about this gently-bred woman enduring our
terrible hardship and with her pittance of strength bending to the tasks
of a peasant woman.  She gathered many of the stones which I built into
the walls of the hut; also, she turned a deaf ear to my entreaties when I
begged her to desist.  She compromised, however, by taking upon herself
the lighter labours of cooking and gathering driftwood and moss for our
winter’s supply.

The hut’s walls rose without difficulty, and everything went smoothly
until the problem of the roof confronted me.  Of what use the four walls
without a roof?  And of what could a roof be made?  There were the spare
oars, very true.  They would serve as roof-beams; but with what was I to
cover them?  Moss would never do.  Tundra grass was impracticable.  We
needed the sail for the boat, and the tarpaulin had begun to leak.

“Winters used walrus skins on his hut,” I said.

“There are the seals,” she suggested.

So next day the hunting began.  I did not know how to shoot, but I
proceeded to learn.  And when I had expended some thirty shells for three
seals, I decided that the ammunition would be exhausted before I acquired
the necessary knowledge.  I had used eight shells for lighting fires
before I hit upon the device of banking the embers with wet moss, and
there remained not over a hundred shells in the box.

“We must club the seals,” I announced, when convinced of my poor
marksmanship.  “I have heard the sealers talk about clubbing them.”

“They are so pretty,” she objected.  “I cannot bear to think of it being
done.  It is so directly brutal, you know; so different from shooting
them.”

“That roof must go on,” I answered grimly.  “Winter is almost here.  It
is our lives against theirs.  It is unfortunate we haven’t plenty of
ammunition, but I think, anyway, that they suffer less from being clubbed
than from being all shot up.  Besides, I shall do the clubbing.”

“That’s just it,” she began eagerly, and broke off in sudden confusion.

“Of course,” I began, “if you prefer—”

“But what shall I be doing?” she interrupted, with that softness I knew
full well to be insistence.

“Gathering firewood and cooking dinner,” I answered lightly.

She shook her head.  “It is too dangerous for you to attempt alone.”

“I know, I know,” she waived my protest.  “I am only a weak woman, but
just my small assistance may enable you to escape disaster.”

“But the clubbing?” I suggested.

“Of course, you will do that.  I shall probably scream.  I’ll look away
when—”

“The danger is most serious,” I laughed.

“I shall use my judgment when to look and when not to look,” she replied
with a grand air.

The upshot of the affair was that she accompanied me next morning.  I
rowed into the adjoining cove and up to the edge of the beach.  There
were seals all about us in the water, and the bellowing thousands on the
beach compelled us to shout at each other to make ourselves heard.

“I know men club them,” I said, trying to reassure myself, and gazing
doubtfully at a large bull, not thirty feet away, upreared on his
fore-flippers and regarding me intently.  “But the question is, How do
they club them?”

“Let us gather tundra grass and thatch the roof,” Maud said.

She was as frightened as I at the prospect, and we had reason to be
gazing at close range at the gleaming teeth and dog-like mouths.

“I always thought they were afraid of men,” I said.

“How do I know they are not afraid?” I queried a moment later, after
having rowed a few more strokes along the beach.  “Perhaps, if I were to
step boldly ashore, they would cut for it, and I could not catch up with
one.”  And still I hesitated.

“I heard of a man, once, who invaded the nesting grounds of wild geese,”
Maud said.  “They killed him.”

“The geese?”

“Yes, the geese.  My brother told me about it when I was a little girl.”

“But I know men club them,” I persisted.

“I think the tundra grass will make just as good a roof,” she said.

Far from her intention, her words were maddening me, driving me on.  I
could not play the coward before her eyes.  “Here goes,” I said, backing
water with one oar and running the bow ashore.

I stepped out and advanced valiantly upon a long-maned bull in the midst
of his wives.  I was armed with the regular club with which the
boat-pullers killed the wounded seals gaffed aboard by the hunters.  It
was only a foot and a half long, and in my superb ignorance I never
dreamed that the club used ashore when raiding the rookeries measured
four to five feet.  The cows lumbered out of my way, and the distance
between me and the bull decreased.  He raised himself on his flippers
with an angry movement.  We were a dozen feet apart.  Still I advanced
steadily, looking for him to turn tail at any moment and run.

At six feet the panicky thought rushed into my mind, What if he will not
run?  Why, then I shall club him, came the answer.  In my fear I had
forgotten that I was there to get the bull instead of to make him run.
And just then he gave a snort and a snarl and rushed at me.  His eyes
were blazing, his mouth was wide open; the teeth gleamed cruelly white.
Without shame, I confess that it was I who turned and footed it.  He ran
awkwardly, but he ran well.  He was but two paces behind when I tumbled
into the boat, and as I shoved off with an oar his teeth crunched down
upon the blade.  The stout wood was crushed like an egg-shell.  Maud and
I were astounded.  A moment later he had dived under the boat, seized the
keel in his mouth, and was shaking the boat violently.

“My!” said Maud.  “Let’s go back.”

I shook my head.  “I can do what other men have done, and I know that
other men have clubbed seals.  But I think I’ll leave the bulls alone
next time.”

“I wish you wouldn’t,” she said.

“Now don’t say, ‘Please, please,’” I cried, half angrily, I do believe.

She made no reply, and I knew my tone must have hurt her.

“I beg your pardon,” I said, or shouted, rather, in order to make myself
heard above the roar of the rookery.  “If you say so, I’ll turn and go
back; but honestly, I’d rather stay.”

“Now don’t say that this is what you get for bringing a woman along,” she
said.  She smiled at me whimsically, gloriously, and I knew there was no
need for forgiveness.

I rowed a couple of hundred feet along the beach so as to recover my
nerves, and then stepped ashore again.

“Do be cautious,” she called after me.

I nodded my head and proceeded to make a flank attack on the nearest
harem.  All went well until I aimed a blow at an outlying cow's head and
fell short.  She snorted and tried to scramble away.  I ran in close and
struck another blow, hitting the shoulder instead of the head.

“Watch out!” I heard Maud scream.

In my excitement I had not been taking notice of other things, and I
looked up to see the lord of the harem charging down upon me.  Again I
fled to the boat, hotly pursued; but this time Maud made no suggestion of
turning back.

“It would be better, I imagine, if you let harems alone and devoted your
attention to lonely and inoffensive-looking seals,” was what she said.
“I think I have read something about them.  Dr. Jordan’s book, I believe.
They are the young bulls, not old enough to have harems of their own.  He
called them the holluschickie, or something like that.  It seems to me if
we find where they haul out—”

“It seems to me that your fighting instinct is aroused,” I laughed.

She flushed quickly and prettily.  “I’ll admit I don’t like defeat any
more than you do, or any more than I like the idea of killing such
pretty, inoffensive creatures.”

“Pretty!” I sniffed.  “I failed to mark anything pre-eminently pretty
about those foamy-mouthed beasts that raced me.”

“Your point of view,” she laughed.  “You lacked perspective.  Now if you
did not have to get so close to the subject—”

“The very thing!” I cried.  “What I need is a longer club.  And there’s
that broken oar ready to hand.”

“It just comes to me,” she said, “that Captain Larsen was telling me how
the men raided the rookeries.  They drive the seals, in small herds, a
short distance inland before they kill them.”

“I don’t care to undertake the herding of one of those harems,” I
objected.

“But there are the holluschickie,” she said.  “The holluschickie haul out
by themselves, and Dr. Jordan says that paths are left between the
harems, and that as long as the holluschickie keep strictly to the path
they are unmolested by the masters of the harem.”

“There’s one now,” I said, pointing to a young bull in the water.  “Let’s
watch him, and follow him if he hauls out.”

He swam directly to the beach and clambered out into a small opening
between two harems, the masters of which made warning noises but did not
attack him.  We watched him travel slowly inward, threading about among
the harems along what must have been the path.

“Here goes,” I said, stepping out; but I confess my heart was in my mouth
as I thought of going through the heart of that monstrous herd.

“It would be wise to make the boat fast,” Maud said.

She had stepped out beside me, and I regarded her with wonderment.

She nodded her head determinedly.  “Yes, I’m going with you, so you may
as well secure the boat and arm me with a club.”

“Let’s go back,” I said dejectedly.  “I think tundra grass, will do,
after all.”

“You know it won’t,” was her reply.  “Shall I lead?”

With a shrug of the shoulders, but with the warmest admiration and pride
at heart for this woman, I equipped her with the broken oar and took
another for myself.  It was with nervous trepidation that we made the
first few rods of the journey.  Once Maud screamed in terror as a cow
thrust an inquisitive nose toward her foot, and several times I quickened
my pace for the same reason.  But, beyond warning coughs from either
side, there were no signs of hostility.  It was a rookery which had never
been raided by the hunters, and in consequence the seals were
mild-tempered and at the same time unafraid.

In the very heart of the herd the din was terrific.  It was almost
dizzying in its effect.  I paused and smiled reassuringly at Maud, for I
had recovered my equanimity sooner than she.  I could see that she was
still badly frightened.  She came close to me and shouted:

“I’m dreadfully afraid!”

And I was not.  Though the novelty had not yet worn off, the peaceful
comportment of the seals had quieted my alarm.  Maud was trembling.

“I’m afraid, and I’m not afraid,” she chattered with shaking jaws.  “It’s
my miserable body, not I.”

“It’s all right, it’s all right,” I reassured her, my arm passing
instinctively and protectingly around her.

I shall never forget, in that moment, how instantly conscious I became of
my manhood.  The primitive deeps of my nature stirred.  I felt myself
masculine, the protector of the weak, the fighting male.  And, best of
all, I felt myself the protector of my loved one.  She leaned against me,
so light and lily-frail, and as her trembling eased away it seemed as
though I became aware of prodigious strength.  I felt myself a match for
the most ferocious bull in the herd, and I know, had such a bull charged
upon me, that I should have met it unflinchingly and quite coolly, and I
know that I should have killed it.

“I am all right now,” she said, looking up at me gratefully.  “Let us go
on.”

And that the strength in me had quieted her and given her confidence,
filled me with an exultant joy.  The youth of the race seemed burgeoning
in me, over-civilized man that I was, and I lived for myself the old
hunting days and forest nights of my remote and forgotten ancestry.  I
had much for which to thank Wolf Larsen, was my thought as we went along
the path between the jostling harems.

A quarter of a mile inland we came upon the holluschickie—sleek young
bulls, living out the loneliness of their bachelorhood and gathering
strength against the day when they would fight their way into the ranks
of the Benedicts.

Everything now went smoothly.  I seemed to know just what to do and how
to do it.  Shouting, making threatening gestures with my club, and even
prodding the lazy ones, I quickly cut out a score of the young bachelors
from their companions.  Whenever one made an attempt to break back toward
the water, I headed it off.  Maud took an active part in the drive, and
with her cries and flourishings of the broken oar was of considerable
assistance.  I noticed, though, that whenever one looked tired and
lagged, she let it slip past.  But I noticed, also, whenever one, with a
show of fight, tried to break past, that her eyes glinted and showed
bright, and she rapped it smartly with her club.

“My, it’s exciting!” she cried, pausing from sheer weakness.  “I think
I’ll sit down.”

I drove the little herd (a dozen strong, now, what of the escapes she had
permitted) a hundred yards farther on; and by the time she joined me I
had finished the slaughter and was beginning to skin.  An hour later we
went proudly back along the path between the harems.  And twice again we
came down the path burdened with skins, till I thought we had enough to
roof the hut.  I set the sail, laid one tack out of the cove, and on the
other tack made our own little inner cove.

“It’s just like home-coming,” Maud said, as I ran the boat ashore.

I heard her words with a responsive thrill, it was all so dearly intimate
and natural, and I said:

“It seems as though I have lived this life always.  The world of books
and bookish folk is very vague, more like a dream memory than an
actuality.  I surely have hunted and forayed and fought all the days of
my life.  And you, too, seem a part of it.  You are—”  I was on the verge
of saying, “my woman, my mate,” but glibly changed it to—“standing the
hardship well.”

But her ear had caught the flaw.  She recognized a flight that midmost
broke.  She gave me a quick look.

“Not that.  You were saying—?”

“That the American Mrs. Meynell was living the life of a savage and
living it quite successfully,” I said easily.

“Oh,” was all she replied; but I could have sworn there was a note of
disappointment in her voice.

But “my woman, my mate” kept ringing in my head for the rest of the day
and for many days.  Yet never did it ring more loudly than that night, as
I watched her draw back the blanket of moss from the coals, blow up the
fire, and cook the evening meal.  It must have been latent savagery
stirring in me, for the old words, so bound up with the roots of the
race, to grip me and thrill me.  And grip and thrill they did, till I
fell asleep, murmuring them to myself over and over again.




CHAPTER XXXI


“It will smell,” I said, “but it will keep in the heat and keep out the
rain and snow.”

We were surveying the completed seal-skin roof.

“It is clumsy, but it will serve the purpose, and that is the main
thing,” I went on, yearning for her praise.

And she clapped her hands and declared that she was hugely pleased.

“But it is dark in here,” she said the next moment, her shoulders
shrinking with a little involuntary shiver.

“You might have suggested a window when the walls were going up,” I said.
“It was for you, and you should have seen the need of a window.”

“But I never do see the obvious, you know,” she laughed back.  “And
besides, you can knock a hole in the wall at any time.”

“Quite true; I had not thought of it,” I replied, wagging my head sagely.
“But have you thought of ordering the window-glass?  Just call up the
firm,—Red, 4451, I think it is,—and tell them what size and kind of glass
you wish.”

“That means—” she began.

“No window.”

It was a dark and evil-appearing thing, that hut, not fit for aught
better than swine in a civilized land; but for us, who had known the
misery of the open boat, it was a snug little habitation.  Following the
housewarming, which was accomplished by means of seal-oil and a wick made
from cotton calking, came the hunting for our winter’s meat and the
building of the second hut.  It was a simple affair, now, to go forth in
the morning and return by noon with a boatload of seals.  And then, while
I worked at building the hut, Maud tried out the oil from the blubber and
kept a slow fire under the frames of meat.  I had heard of jerking beef
on the plains, and our seal-meat, cut in thin strips and hung in the
smoke, cured excellently.

The second hut was easier to erect, for I built it against the first, and
only three walls were required.  But it was work, hard work, all of it.
Maud and I worked from dawn till dark, to the limit of our strength, so
that when night came we crawled stiffly to bed and slept the animal-like
sleep of exhaustion.  And yet Maud declared that she had never felt better
or stronger in her life.  I knew this was true of myself, but hers was
such a lily strength that I feared she would break down.  Often and
often, her last-reserve force gone, I have seen her stretched flat on her
back on the sand in the way she had of resting and recuperating.  And
then she would be up on her feet and toiling hard as ever.  Where she
obtained this strength was the marvel to me.

“Think of the long rest this winter,” was her reply to my remonstrances.
“Why, we’ll be clamorous for something to do.”

We held a housewarming in my hut the night it was roofed.  It was the end
of the third day of a fierce storm which had swung around the compass
from the south-east to the north-west, and which was then blowing
directly in upon us.  The beaches of the outer cove were thundering with
the surf, and even in our land-locked inner cove a respectable sea was
breaking.  No high backbone of island sheltered us from the wind, and it
whistled and bellowed about the hut till at times I feared for the
strength of the walls.  The skin roof, stretched tightly as a drumhead, I
had thought, sagged and bellied with every gust; and innumerable
interstices in the walls, not so tightly stuffed with moss as Maud had
supposed, disclosed themselves.  Yet the seal-oil burned brightly and we
were warm and comfortable.

It was a pleasant evening indeed, and we voted that as a social function
on Endeavour Island it had not yet been eclipsed.  Our minds were at
ease.  Not only had we resigned ourselves to the bitter winter, but we
were prepared for it.  The seals could depart on their mysterious journey
into the south at any time, now, for all we cared; and the storms held no
terror for us.  Not only were we sure of being dry and warm and sheltered
from the wind, but we had the softest and most luxurious mattresses that
could be made from moss.  This had been Maud’s idea, and she had herself
jealously gathered all the moss.  This was to be my first night on the
mattress, and I knew I should sleep the sweeter because she had made it.

As she rose to go she turned to me with the whimsical way she had, and
said:

“Something is going to happen—is happening, for that matter.  I feel it.
Something is coming here, to us.  It is coming now.  I don’t know what,
but it is coming.”

“Good or bad?” I asked.

She shook her head.  “I don’t know, but it is there, somewhere.”

She pointed in the direction of the sea and wind.

“It’s a lee shore,” I laughed, “and I am sure I’d rather be here than
arriving, a night like this.”

“You are not frightened?” I asked, as I stepped to open the door for her.

Her eyes looked bravely into mine.

“And you feel well? perfectly well?”

“Never better,” was her answer.

We talked a little longer before she went.

“Good-night, Maud,” I said.

“Good-night, Humphrey,” she said.

This use of our given names had come about quite as a matter of course,
and was as unpremeditated as it was natural.  In that moment I could have
put my arms around her and drawn her to me.  I should certainly have done
so out in that world to which we belonged.  As it was, the situation
stopped there in the only way it could; but I was left alone in my little
hut, glowing warmly through and through with a pleasant satisfaction; and
I knew that a tie, or a tacit something, existed between us which had not
existed before.




CHAPTER XXXII


I awoke, oppressed by a mysterious sensation.  There seemed something
missing in my environment.  But the mystery and oppressiveness vanished
after the first few seconds of waking, when I identified the missing
something as the wind.  I had fallen asleep in that state of nerve
tension with which one meets the continuous shock of sound or movement,
and I had awakened, still tense, bracing myself to meet the pressure of
something which no longer bore upon me.

It was the first night I had spent under cover in several months, and I
lay luxuriously for some minutes under my blankets (for once not wet with
fog or spray), analysing, first, the effect produced upon me by the
cessation of the wind, and next, the joy which was mine from resting on
the mattress made by Maud’s hands.  When I had dressed and opened the
door, I heard the waves still lapping on the beach, garrulously attesting
the fury of the night.  It was a clear day, and the sun was shining.  I
had slept late, and I stepped outside with sudden energy, bent upon
making up lost time as befitted a dweller on Endeavour Island.

And when outside, I stopped short.  I believed my eyes without question,
and yet I was for the moment stunned by what they disclosed to me.
There, on the beach, not fifty feet away, bow on, dismasted, was a
black-hulled vessel.  Masts and booms, tangled with shrouds, sheets, and
rent canvas, were rubbing gently alongside.  I could have rubbed my eyes
as I looked.  There was the home-made galley we had built, the familiar
break of the poop, the low yacht-cabin scarcely rising above the rail.
It was the _Ghost_.

What freak of fortune had brought it here—here of all spots? what chance
of chances?  I looked at the bleak, inaccessible wall at my back and knew
the profundity of despair.  Escape was hopeless, out of the question.  I
thought of Maud, asleep there in the hut we had reared; I remembered her
“Good-night, Humphrey”; “my woman, my mate,” went ringing through my
brain, but now, alas, it was a knell that sounded.  Then everything went
black before my eyes.

Possibly it was the fraction of a second, but I had no knowledge of how
long an interval had lapsed before I was myself again.  There lay the
_Ghost_, bow on to the beach, her splintered bowsprit projecting over the
sand, her tangled spars rubbing against her side to the lift of the
crooning waves.  Something must be done, must be done.

It came upon me suddenly, as strange, that nothing moved aboard.  Wearied
from the night of struggle and wreck, all hands were yet asleep, I
thought.  My next thought was that Maud and I might yet escape.  If we
could take to the boat and make round the point before any one awoke?  I
would call her and start.  My hand was lifted at her door to knock, when
I recollected the smallness of the island.  We could never hide ourselves
upon it.  There was nothing for us but the wide raw ocean.  I thought of
our snug little huts, our supplies of meat and oil and moss and firewood,
and I knew that we could never survive the wintry sea and the great
storms which were to come.

So I stood, with hesitant knuckle, without her door.  It was impossible,
impossible.  A wild thought of rushing in and killing her as she slept
rose in my mind.  And then, in a flash, the better solution came to me.
All hands were asleep.  Why not creep aboard the _Ghost_,—well I knew the
way to Wolf Larsen’s bunk,—and kill him in his sleep?  After that—well,
we would see.  But with him dead there was time and space in which to
prepare to do other things; and besides, whatever new situation arose, it
could not possibly be worse than the present one.

My knife was at my hip.  I returned to my hut for the shot-gun, made sure
it was loaded, and went down to the _Ghost_.  With some difficulty, and
at the expense of a wetting to the waist, I climbed aboard.  The
forecastle scuttle was open.  I paused to listen for the breathing of the
men, but there was no breathing.  I almost gasped as the thought came to
me: What if the _Ghost_ is deserted?  I listened more closely.  There was
no sound.  I cautiously descended the ladder.  The place had the empty
and musty feel and smell usual to a dwelling no longer inhabited.
Everywhere was a thick litter of discarded and ragged garments, old
sea-boots, leaky oilskins—all the worthless forecastle dunnage of a long
voyage.

Abandoned hastily, was my conclusion, as I ascended to the deck.  Hope
was alive again in my breast, and I looked about me with greater
coolness.  I noted that the boats were missing.  The steerage told the
same tale as the forecastle.  The hunters had packed their belongings
with similar haste.  The _Ghost_ was deserted.  It was Maud’s and mine.
I thought of the ship’s stores and the lazarette beneath the cabin, and
the idea came to me of surprising Maud with something nice for breakfast.

The reaction from my fear, and the knowledge that the terrible deed I had
come to do was no longer necessary, made me boyish and eager.  I went up
the steerage companion-way two steps at a time, with nothing distinct in
my mind except joy and the hope that Maud would sleep on until the
surprise breakfast was quite ready for her.  As I rounded the galley, a
new satisfaction was mine at thought of all the splendid cooking utensils
inside.  I sprang up the break of the poop, and saw—Wolf Larsen.  What of
my impetus and the stunning surprise, I clattered three or four steps
along the deck before I could stop myself.  He was standing in the
companion-way, only his head and shoulders visible, staring straight at
me.  His arms were resting on the half-open slide.  He made no movement
whatever—simply stood there, staring at me.

I began to tremble.  The old stomach sickness clutched me.  I put one
hand on the edge of the house to steady myself.  My lips seemed suddenly
dry and I moistened them against the need of speech.  Nor did I for an
instant take my eyes off him.  Neither of us spoke.  There was something
ominous in his silence, his immobility.  All my old fear of him returned
and by my new fear was increased an hundred-fold.  And still we stood, the
pair of us, staring at each other.

I was aware of the demand for action, and, my old helplessness strong
upon me, I was waiting for him to take the initiative.  Then, as the
moments went by, it came to me that the situation was analogous to the
one in which I had approached the long-maned bull, my intention of
clubbing obscured by fear until it became a desire to make him run.  So
it was at last impressed upon me that I was there, not to have Wolf
Larsen take the initiative, but to take it myself.

I cocked both barrels and levelled the shot-gun at him.  Had he moved,
attempted to drop down the companion-way, I know I would have shot him.
But he stood motionless and staring as before.  And as I faced him, with
levelled gun shaking in my hands, I had time to note the worn and haggard
appearance of his face.  It was as if some strong anxiety had wasted it.
The cheeks were sunken, and there was a wearied, puckered expression on
the brow.  And it seemed to me that his eyes were strange, not only the
expression, but the physical seeming, as though the optic nerves and
supporting muscles had suffered strain and slightly twisted the eyeballs.

All this I saw, and my brain now working rapidly, I thought a thousand
thoughts; and yet I could not pull the triggers.  I lowered the gun and
stepped to the corner of the cabin, primarily to relieve the tension on
my nerves and to make a new start, and incidentally to be closer.  Again
I raised the gun.  He was almost at arm’s length.  There was no hope for
him.  I was resolved.  There was no possible chance of missing him, no
matter how poor my marksmanship.  And yet I wrestled with myself and
could not pull the triggers.

“Well?” he demanded impatiently.

I strove vainly to force my fingers down on the triggers, and vainly I
strove to say something.

“Why don’t you shoot?” he asked.

I cleared my throat of a huskiness which prevented speech.  “Hump,” he
said slowly, “you can’t do it.  You are not exactly afraid.  You are
impotent.  Your conventional morality is stronger than you.  You are the
slave to the opinions which have credence among the people you have known
and have read about.  Their code has been drummed into your head from the
time you lisped, and in spite of your philosophy, and of what I have
taught you, it won’t let you kill an unarmed, unresisting man.”

“I know it,” I said hoarsely.

“And you know that I would kill an unarmed man as readily as I would
smoke a cigar,” he went on.  “You know me for what I am,—my worth in the
world by your standard.  You have called me snake, tiger, shark, monster,
and Caliban.  And yet, you little rag puppet, you little echoing
mechanism, you are unable to kill me as you would a snake or a shark,
because I have hands, feet, and a body shaped somewhat like yours.  Bah!
I had hoped better things of you, Hump.”

He stepped out of the companion-way and came up to me.

“Put down that gun.  I want to ask you some questions.  I haven’t had a
chance to look around yet.  What place is this?  How is the _Ghost_
lying?  How did you get wet?  Where’s Maud?—I beg your pardon, Miss
Brewster—or should I say, ‘Mrs. Van Weyden’?”

I had backed away from him, almost weeping at my inability to shoot him,
but not fool enough to put down the gun.  I hoped, desperately, that he
might commit some hostile act, attempt to strike me or choke me; for in
such way only I knew I could be stirred to shoot.

“This is Endeavour Island,” I said.

“Never heard of it,” he broke in.

“At least, that’s our name for it,” I amended.

“Our?” he queried.  “Who’s our?”

“Miss Brewster and myself.  And the _Ghost_ is lying, as you can see for
yourself, bow on to the beach.”

“There are seals here,” he said.  “They woke me up with their barking, or
I’d be sleeping yet.  I heard them when I drove in last night.  They were
the first warning that I was on a lee shore.  It’s a rookery, the kind of
a thing I’ve hunted for years.  Thanks to my brother Death, I’ve lighted
on a fortune.  It’s a mint.  What’s its bearings?”

“Haven’t the least idea,” I said.  “But you ought to know quite closely.
What were your last observations?”

He smiled inscrutably, but did not answer.

“Well, where’s all hands?” I asked.  “How does it come that you are
alone?”

I was prepared for him again to set aside my question, and was surprised
at the readiness of his reply.

“My brother got me inside forty-eight hours, and through no fault of
mine.  Boarded me in the night with only the watch on deck.  Hunters went
back on me.  He gave them a bigger lay.  Heard him offering it.  Did it
right before me.  Of course the crew gave me the go-by.  That was to be
expected.  All hands went over the side, and there I was, marooned on my
own vessel.  It was Death’s turn, and it’s all in the family anyway.”

“But how did you lose the masts?” I asked.

“Walk over and examine those lanyards,” he said, pointing to where the
mizzen-rigging should have been.

“They have been cut with a knife!” I exclaimed.

“Not quite,” he laughed.  “It was a neater job.  Look again.”

I looked.  The lanyards had been almost severed, with just enough left to
hold the shrouds till some severe strain should be put upon them.

“Cooky did that,” he laughed again.  “I know, though I didn’t spot him at
it.  Kind of evened up the score a bit.”

“Good for Mugridge!” I cried.

“Yes, that’s what I thought when everything went over the side.  Only I
said it on the other side of my mouth.”

“But what were you doing while all this was going on?” I asked.

“My best, you may be sure, which wasn’t much under the circumstances.”

I turned to re-examine Thomas Mugridge’s work.

“I guess I’ll sit down and take the sunshine,” I heard Wolf Larsen
saying.

There was a hint, just a slight hint, of physical feebleness in his
voice, and it was so strange that I looked quickly at him.  His hand was
sweeping nervously across his face, as though he were brushing away
cobwebs.  I was puzzled.  The whole thing was so unlike the Wolf Larsen I
had known.

“How are your headaches?” I asked.

“They still trouble me,” was his answer.  “I think I have one coming on
now.”

He slipped down from his sitting posture till he lay on the deck.  Then
he rolled over on his side, his head resting on the biceps of the under
arm, the forearm shielding his eyes from the sun.  I stood regarding him
wonderingly.

“Now’s your chance, Hump,” he said.

“I don’t understand,” I lied, for I thoroughly understood.

“Oh, nothing,” he added softly, as if he were drowsing; “only you’ve got
me where you want me.”

“No, I haven’t,” I retorted; “for I want you a few thousand miles away
from here.”

He chuckled, and thereafter spoke no more.  He did not stir as I passed
by him and went down into the cabin.  I lifted the trap in the floor, but
for some moments gazed dubiously into the darkness of the lazarette
beneath.  I hesitated to descend.  What if his lying down were a ruse?
Pretty, indeed, to be caught there like a rat.  I crept softly up the
companion-way and peeped at him.  He was lying as I had left him.  Again
I went below; but before I dropped into the lazarette I took the
precaution of casting down the door in advance.  At least there would be
no lid to the trap.  But it was all needless.  I regained the cabin with
a store of jams, sea-biscuits, canned meats, and such things,—all I could
carry,—and replaced the trap-door.

A peep at Wolf Larsen showed me that he had not moved.  A bright thought
struck me.  I stole into his state-room and possessed myself of his
revolvers.  There were no other weapons, though I thoroughly ransacked
the three remaining state-rooms.  To make sure, I returned and went
through the steerage and forecastle, and in the galley gathered up all
the sharp meat and vegetable knives.  Then I bethought me of the great
yachtsman’s knife he always carried, and I came to him and spoke to him,
first softly, then loudly.  He did not move.  I bent over and took it
from his pocket.  I breathed more freely.  He had no arms with which to
attack me from a distance; while I, armed, could always forestall him
should he attempt to grapple me with his terrible gorilla arms.

Filling a coffee-pot and frying-pan with part of my plunder, and taking
some chinaware from the cabin pantry, I left Wolf Larsen lying in the sun
and went ashore.

Maud was still asleep.  I blew up the embers (we had not yet arranged a
winter kitchen), and quite feverishly cooked the breakfast.  Toward the
end, I heard her moving about within the hut, making her toilet.  Just as
all was ready and the coffee poured, the door opened and she came forth.

“It’s not fair of you,” was her greeting.  “You are usurping one of my
prerogatives.  You know you agreed that the cooking should be mine,
and—”

“But just this once,” I pleaded.

“If you promise not to do it again,” she smiled.  “Unless, of course, you
have grown tired of my poor efforts.”

To my delight she never once looked toward the beach, and I maintained
the banter with such success all unconsciously she sipped coffee from the
china cup, ate fried evaporated potatoes, and spread marmalade on her
biscuit.  But it could not last.  I saw the surprise that came over her.
She had discovered the china plate from which she was eating.  She looked
over the breakfast, noting detail after detail.  Then she looked at me,
and her face turned slowly toward the beach.

“Humphrey!” she said.

The old unnamable terror mounted into her eyes.

“Is—he?” she quavered.

I nodded my head.




CHAPTER XXXIII


We waited all day for Wolf Larsen to come ashore.  It was an intolerable
period of anxiety.  Each moment one or the other of us cast expectant
glances toward the _Ghost_.  But he did not come.  He did not even appear
on deck.

“Perhaps it is his headache,” I said.  “I left him lying on the poop.  He
may lie there all night.  I think I’ll go and see.”

Maud looked entreaty at me.

“It is all right,” I assured her.  “I shall take the revolvers.  You know
I collected every weapon on board.”

“But there are his arms, his hands, his terrible, terrible hands!” she
objected.  And then she cried, “Oh, Humphrey, I am afraid of him!  Don’t
go—please don’t go!”

She rested her hand appealingly on mine, and sent my pulse fluttering.
My heart was surely in my eyes for a moment.  The dear and lovely woman!
And she was so much the woman, clinging and appealing, sunshine and dew
to my manhood, rooting it deeper and sending through it the sap of a new
strength.  I was for putting my arm around her, as when in the midst of
the seal herd; but I considered, and refrained.

“I shall not take any risks,” I said.  “I’ll merely peep over the bow and
see.”

She pressed my hand earnestly and let me go.  But the space on deck where
I had left him lying was vacant.  He had evidently gone below.  That
night we stood alternate watches, one of us sleeping at a time; for there
was no telling what Wolf Larsen might do.  He was certainly capable of
anything.

The next day we waited, and the next, and still he made no sign.

“These headaches of his, these attacks,” Maud said, on the afternoon of
the fourth day; “Perhaps he is ill, very ill.  He may be dead.”

“Or dying,” was her afterthought when she had waited some time for me to
speak.

“Better so,” I answered.

“But think, Humphrey, a fellow-creature in his last lonely hour.”

“Perhaps,” I suggested.

“Yes, even perhaps,” she acknowledged.  “But we do not know.  It would be
terrible if he were.  I could never forgive myself.  We must do
something.”

“Perhaps,” I suggested again.

I waited, smiling inwardly at the woman of her which compelled a
solicitude for Wolf Larsen, of all creatures.  Where was her solicitude
for me, I thought,—for me whom she had been afraid to have merely peep
aboard?

She was too subtle not to follow the trend of my silence.  And she was as
direct as she was subtle.

“You must go aboard, Humphrey, and find out,” she said.  “And if you want
to laugh at me, you have my consent and forgiveness.”

I arose obediently and went down the beach.

“Do be careful,” she called after me.

I waved my arm from the forecastle head and dropped down to the deck.
Aft I walked to the cabin companion, where I contented myself with
hailing below.  Wolf Larsen answered, and as he started to ascend the
stairs I cocked my revolver.  I displayed it openly during our
conversation, but he took no notice of it.  He appeared the same,
physically, as when last I saw him, but he was gloomy and silent.  In
fact, the few words we spoke could hardly be called a conversation.  I
did not inquire why he had not been ashore, nor did he ask why I had not
come aboard.  His head was all right again, he said, and so, without
further parley, I left him.

Maud received my report with obvious relief, and the sight of smoke which
later rose in the galley put her in a more cheerful mood.  The next day,
and the next, we saw the galley smoke rising, and sometimes we caught
glimpses of him on the poop.  But that was all.  He made no attempt to
come ashore.  This we knew, for we still maintained our night-watches.
We were waiting for him to do something, to show his hand, so to say, and
his inaction puzzled and worried us.

A week of this passed by.  We had no other interest than Wolf Larsen, and
his presence weighed us down with an apprehension which prevented us from
doing any of the little things we had planned.

But at the end of the week the smoke ceased rising from the galley, and
he no longer showed himself on the poop.  I could see Maud’s solicitude
again growing, though she timidly—and even proudly, I think—forbore a
repetition of her request.  After all, what censure could be put upon
her?  She was divinely altruistic, and she was a woman.  Besides, I was
myself aware of hurt at thought of this man whom I had tried to kill,
dying alone with his fellow-creatures so near.  He was right.  The code
of my group was stronger than I.  The fact that he had hands, feet, and a
body shaped somewhat like mine, constituted a claim which I could not
ignore.

So I did not wait a second time for Maud to send me.  I discovered that
we stood in need of condensed milk and marmalade, and announced that I
was going aboard.  I could see that she wavered.  She even went so far as
to murmur that they were non-essentials and that my trip after them might
be inexpedient.  And as she had followed the trend of my silence, she now
followed the trend of my speech, and she knew that I was going aboard,
not because of condensed milk and marmalade, but because of her and of
her anxiety, which she knew she had failed to hide.

I took off my shoes when I gained the forecastle head, and went
noiselessly aft in my stocking feet.  Nor did I call this time from the
top of the companion-way.  Cautiously descending, I found the cabin
deserted.  The door to his state-room was closed.  At first I thought of
knocking, then I remembered my ostensible errand and resolved to carry it
out.  Carefully avoiding noise, I lifted the trap-door in the floor and
set it to one side.  The slop-chest, as well as the provisions, was
stored in the lazarette, and I took advantage of the opportunity to lay
in a stock of underclothing.

As I emerged from the lazarette I heard sounds in Wolf Larsen’s
state-room.  I crouched and listened.  The door-knob rattled.  Furtively,
instinctively, I slunk back behind the table and drew and cocked my
revolver.  The door swung open and he came forth.  Never had I seen so
profound a despair as that which I saw on his face,—the face of Wolf
Larsen the fighter, the strong man, the indomitable one.  For all the
world like a woman wringing her hands, he raised his clenched fists and
groaned.  One fist unclosed, and the open palm swept across his eyes as
though brushing away cobwebs.

“God!  God!” he groaned, and the clenched fists were raised again to the
infinite despair with which his throat vibrated.

It was horrible.  I was trembling all over, and I could feel the shivers
running up and down my spine and the sweat standing out on my forehead.
Surely there can be little in this world more awful than the spectacle of
a strong man in the moment when he is utterly weak and broken.

But Wolf Larsen regained control of himself by an exertion of his
remarkable will.  And it was exertion.  His whole frame shook with the
struggle.  He resembled a man on the verge of a fit.  His face strove to
compose itself, writhing and twisting in the effort till he broke down
again.  Once more the clenched fists went upward and he groaned.  He
caught his breath once or twice and sobbed.  Then he was successful.  I
could have thought him the old Wolf Larsen, and yet there was in his
movements a vague suggestion of weakness and indecision.  He started for
the companion-way, and stepped forward quite as I had been accustomed to
see him do; and yet again, in his very walk, there seemed that suggestion
of weakness and indecision.

I was now concerned with fear for myself.  The open trap lay directly in
his path, and his discovery of it would lead instantly to his discovery
of me.  I was angry with myself for being caught in so cowardly a
position, crouching on the floor.  There was yet time.  I rose swiftly to
my feet, and, I know, quite unconsciously assumed a defiant attitude.  He
took no notice of me.  Nor did he notice the open trap.  Before I could
grasp the situation, or act, he had walked right into the trap.  One foot
was descending into the opening, while the other foot was just on the
verge of beginning the uplift.  But when the descending foot missed the
solid flooring and felt vacancy beneath, it was the old Wolf Larsen and
the tiger muscles that made the falling body spring across the opening,
even as it fell, so that he struck on his chest and stomach, with arms
outstretched, on the floor of the opposite side.  The next instant he had
drawn up his legs and rolled clear.  But he rolled into my marmalade and
underclothes and against the trap-door.

The expression on his face was one of complete comprehension.  But before
I could guess what he had comprehended, he had dropped the trap-door into
place, closing the lazarette.  Then I understood.  He thought he had me
inside.  Also, he was blind, blind as a bat.  I watched him, breathing
carefully so that he should not hear me.  He stepped quickly to his
state-room.  I saw his hand miss the door-knob by an inch, quickly fumble
for it, and find it.  This was my chance.  I tiptoed across the cabin and
to the top of the stairs.  He came back, dragging a heavy sea-chest,
which he deposited on top of the trap.  Not content with this he fetched
a second chest and placed it on top of the first.  Then he gathered up
the marmalade and underclothes and put them on the table.  When he
started up the companion-way, I retreated, silently rolling over on top
of the cabin.

He shoved the slide part way back and rested his arms on it, his body
still in the companion-way.  His attitude was of one looking forward the
length of the schooner, or staring, rather, for his eyes were fixed and
unblinking.  I was only five feet away and directly in what should have
been his line of vision.  It was uncanny.  I felt myself a ghost, what of
my invisibility.  I waved my hand back and forth, of course without
effect; but when the moving shadow fell across his face I saw at once
that he was susceptible to the impression.  His face became more
expectant and tense as he tried to analyze and identify the impression.
He knew that he had responded to something from without, that his
sensibility had been touched by a changing something in his environment;
but what it was he could not discover.  I ceased waving my hand, so that
the shadow remained stationary.  He slowly moved his head back and forth
under it and turned from side to side, now in the sunshine, now in the
shade, feeling the shadow, as it were, testing it by sensation.

I, too, was busy, trying to reason out how he was aware of the existence
of so intangible a thing as a shadow.  If it were his eyeballs only that
were affected, or if his optic nerve were not wholly destroyed, the
explanation was simple.  If otherwise, then the only conclusion I could
reach was that the sensitive skin recognized the difference of
temperature between shade and sunshine.  Or, perhaps,—who can tell?—it
was that fabled sixth sense which conveyed to him the loom and feel of an
object close at hand.

Giving over his attempt to determine the shadow, he stepped on deck and
started forward, walking with a swiftness and confidence which surprised
me.  And still there was that hint of the feebleness of the blind in his
walk.  I knew it now for what it was.

To my amused chagrin, he discovered my shoes on the forecastle head and
brought them back with him into the galley.  I watched him build the fire
and set about cooking food for himself; then I stole into the cabin for
my marmalade and underclothes, slipped back past the galley, and climbed
down to the beach to deliver my barefoot report.




CHAPTER XXXIV


“It’s too bad the _Ghost_ has lost her masts.  Why we could sail away in
her.  Don’t you think we could, Humphrey?”

I sprang excitedly to my feet.

“I wonder, I wonder,” I repeated, pacing up and down.

Maud’s eyes were shining with anticipation as they followed me.  She had
such faith in me!  And the thought of it was so much added power.  I
remembered Michelet’s “To man, woman is as the earth was to her legendary
son; he has but to fall down and kiss her breast and he is strong again.”
For the first time I knew the wonderful truth of his words.  Why, I was
living them.  Maud was all this to me, an unfailing source of strength
and courage.  I had but to look at her, or think of her, and be strong
again.

“It can be done, it can be done,” I was thinking and asserting aloud.
“What men have done, I can do; and if they have never done this before,
still I can do it.”

“What? for goodness’ sake,” Maud demanded.  “Do be merciful.  What is it
you can do?”

“We can do it,” I amended.  “Why, nothing else than put the masts back
into the _Ghost_ and sail away.”

“Humphrey!” she exclaimed.

And I felt as proud of my conception as if it were already a fact
accomplished.

“But how is it possible to be done?” she asked.

“I don’t know,” was my answer.  “I know only that I am capable of doing
anything these days.”

I smiled proudly at her—too proudly, for she dropped her eyes and was for
the moment silent.

“But there is Captain Larsen,” she objected.

“Blind and helpless,” I answered promptly, waving him aside as a straw.

“But those terrible hands of his!  You know how he leaped across the
opening of the lazarette.”

“And you know also how I crept about and avoided him,” I contended gaily.

“And lost your shoes.”

“You’d hardly expect them to avoid Wolf Larsen without my feet inside of
them.”

We both laughed, and then went seriously to work constructing the plan
whereby we were to step the masts of the _Ghost_ and return to the world.
I remembered hazily the physics of my school days, while the last few
months had given me practical experience with mechanical purchases.  I
must say, though, when we walked down to the _Ghost_ to inspect more
closely the task before us, that the sight of the great masts lying in
the water almost disheartened me.  Where were we to begin?  If there had
been one mast standing, something high up to which to fasten blocks and
tackles!  But there was nothing.  It reminded me of the problem of
lifting oneself by one’s boot-straps.  I understood the mechanics of
levers; but where was I to get a fulcrum?

There was the mainmast, fifteen inches in diameter at what was now the
butt, still sixty-five feet in length, and weighing, I roughly
calculated, at least three thousand pounds.  And then came the foremast,
larger in diameter, and weighing surely thirty-five hundred pounds.
Where was I to begin?  Maud stood silently by my side, while I evolved in
my mind the contrivance known among sailors as “shears.”  But, though
known to sailors, I invented it there on Endeavour Island.  By crossing
and lashing the ends of two spars, and then elevating them in the air
like an inverted “V,” I could get a point above the deck to which to make
fast my hoisting tackle.  To this hoisting tackle I could, if necessary,
attach a second hoisting tackle.  And then there was the windlass!

Maud saw that I had achieved a solution, and her eyes warmed
sympathetically.

“What are you going to do?” she asked.

“Clear that raffle,” I answered, pointing to the tangled wreckage
overside.

Ah, the decisiveness, the very sound of the words, was good in my ears.
“Clear that raffle!”  Imagine so salty a phrase on the lips of the
Humphrey Van Weyden of a few months gone!

There must have been a touch of the melodramatic in my pose and voice,
for Maud smiled.  Her appreciation of the ridiculous was keen, and in all
things she unerringly saw and felt, where it existed, the touch of sham,
the overshading, the overtone.  It was this which had given poise and
penetration to her own work and made her of worth to the world.  The
serious critic, with the sense of humour and the power of expression,
must inevitably command the world’s ear.  And so it was that she had
commanded.  Her sense of humour was really the artist’s instinct for
proportion.

“I’m sure I’ve heard it before, somewhere, in books,” she murmured
gleefully.

I had an instinct for proportion myself, and I collapsed forthwith,
descending from the dominant pose of a master of matter to a state of
humble confusion which was, to say the least, very miserable.

Her hand leapt out at once to mine.

“I’m so sorry,” she said.

“No need to be,” I gulped.  “It does me good.  There’s too much of the
schoolboy in me.  All of which is neither here nor there.  What we’ve got
to do is actually and literally to clear that raffle.  If you’ll come
with me in the boat, we’ll get to work and straighten things out.”

“‘When the topmen clear the raffle with their clasp-knives in their
teeth,’” she quoted at me; and for the rest of the afternoon we made
merry over our labour.

Her task was to hold the boat in position while I worked at the tangle.
And such a tangle—halyards, sheets, guys, down-hauls, shrouds, stays, all
washed about and back and forth and through, and twined and knotted by
the sea.  I cut no more than was necessary, and what with passing the
long ropes under and around the booms and masts, of unreeving the
halyards and sheets, of coiling down in the boat and uncoiling in order
to pass through another knot in the bight, I was soon wet to the skin.

The sails did require some cutting, and the canvas, heavy with water,
tried my strength severely; but I succeeded before nightfall in getting
it all spread out on the beach to dry.  We were both very tired when we
knocked off for supper, and we had done good work, too, though to the eye
it appeared insignificant.

Next morning, with Maud as able assistant, I went into the hold of the
_Ghost_ to clear the steps of the mast-butts.  We had no more than begun
work when the sound of my knocking and hammering brought Wolf Larsen.

“Hello below!” he cried down the open hatch.

The sound of his voice made Maud quickly draw close to me, as for
protection, and she rested one hand on my arm while we parleyed.

“Hello on deck,” I replied.  “Good-morning to you.”

“What are you doing down there?” he demanded.  “Trying to scuttle my ship
for me?”

“Quite the opposite; I’m repairing her,” was my answer.

“But what in thunder are you repairing?”  There was puzzlement in his
voice.

“Why, I’m getting everything ready for re-stepping the masts,” I replied
easily, as though it were the simplest project imaginable.

“It seems as though you’re standing on your own legs at last, Hump,” we
heard him say; and then for some time he was silent.

“But I say, Hump,” he called down.  “You can’t do it.”

“Oh, yes, I can,” I retorted.  “I’m doing it now.”

“But this is my vessel, my particular property.  What if I forbid you?”

“You forget,” I replied.  “You are no longer the biggest bit of the
ferment.  You were, once, and able to eat me, as you were pleased to
phrase it; but there has been a diminishing, and I am now able to eat
you.  The yeast has grown stale.”

He gave a short, disagreeable laugh.  “I see you’re working my philosophy
back on me for all it is worth.  But don’t make the mistake of
under-estimating me.  For your own good I warn you.”

“Since when have you become a philanthropist?” I queried.  “Confess, now,
in warning me for my own good, that you are very consistent.”

He ignored my sarcasm, saying, “Suppose I clap the hatch on, now?  You
won’t fool me as you did in the lazarette.”

“Wolf Larsen,” I said sternly, for the first time addressing him by this
his most familiar name, “I am unable to shoot a helpless, unresisting
man.  You have proved that to my satisfaction as well as yours.  But I
warn you now, and not so much for your own good as for mine, that I shall
shoot you the moment you attempt a hostile act.  I can shoot you now, as
I stand here; and if you are so minded, just go ahead and try to clap on
the hatch.”

“Nevertheless, I forbid you, I distinctly forbid your tampering with my
ship.”

“But, man!” I expostulated, “you advance the fact that it is your ship as
though it were a moral right.  You have never considered moral rights in
your dealings with others.  You surely do not dream that I’ll consider
them in dealing with you?”

I had stepped underneath the open hatchway so that I could see him.  The
lack of expression on his face, so different from when I had watched him
unseen, was enhanced by the unblinking, staring eyes.  It was not a
pleasant face to look upon.

“And none so poor, not even Hump, to do him reverence,” he sneered.

The sneer was wholly in his voice.  His face remained expressionless as
ever.

“How do you do, Miss Brewster,” he said suddenly, after a pause.

I started.  She had made no noise whatever, had not even moved.  Could it
be that some glimmer of vision remained to him? or that his vision was
coming back?

“How do you do, Captain Larsen,” she answered.  “Pray, how did you know I
was here?”

“Heard you breathing, of course.  I say, Hump’s improving, don’t you
think so?”

“I don’t know,” she answered, smiling at me.  “I have never seen him
otherwise.”

“You should have seen him before, then.”

“Wolf Larsen, in large doses,” I murmured, “before and after taking.”

“I want to tell you again, Hump,” he said threateningly, “that you’d
better leave things alone.”

“But don’t you care to escape as well as we?” I asked incredulously.

“No,” was his answer.  “I intend dying here.”

“Well, we don’t,” I concluded defiantly, beginning again my knocking and
hammering.




CHAPTER XXXV


Next day, the mast-steps clear and everything in readiness, we started to
get the two topmasts aboard.  The maintopmast was over thirty feet in
length, the foretopmast nearly thirty, and it was of these that I
intended making the shears.  It was puzzling work.  Fastening one end of
a heavy tackle to the windlass, and with the other end fast to the butt
of the foretopmast, I began to heave.  Maud held the turn on the windlass
and coiled down the slack.

We were astonished at the ease with which the spar was lifted.  It was an
improved crank windlass, and the purchase it gave was enormous.  Of
course, what it gave us in power we paid for in distance; as many times
as it doubled my strength, that many times was doubled the length of rope
I heaved in.  The tackle dragged heavily across the rail, increasing its
drag as the spar arose more and more out of the water, and the exertion
on the windlass grew severe.

But when the butt of the topmast was level with the rail, everything came
to a standstill.

“I might have known it,” I said impatiently.  “Now we have to do it all
over again.”

“Why not fasten the tackle part way down the mast?” Maud suggested.

“It’s what I should have done at first,” I answered, hugely disgusted
with myself.

Slipping off a turn, I lowered the mast back into the water and fastened
the tackle a third of the way down from the butt.  In an hour, what of
this and of rests between the heaving, I had hoisted it to the point
where I could hoist no more.  Eight feet of the butt was above the rail,
and I was as far away as ever from getting the spar on board.  I sat down
and pondered the problem.  It did not take long.  I sprang jubilantly to
my feet.

“Now I have it!” I cried.  “I ought to make the tackle fast at the point
of balance.  And what we learn of this will serve us with everything else
we have to hoist aboard.”

Once again I undid all my work by lowering the mast into the water.  But
I miscalculated the point of balance, so that when I heaved the top of
the mast came up instead of the butt.  Maud looked despair, but I laughed
and said it would do just as well.

Instructing her how to hold the turn and be ready to slack away at
command, I laid hold of the mast with my hands and tried to balance it
inboard across the rail.  When I thought I had it I cried to her to slack
away; but the spar righted, despite my efforts, and dropped back toward
the water.  Again I heaved it up to its old position, for I had now
another idea.  I remembered the watch-tackle—a small double and single
block affair—and fetched it.

While I was rigging it between the top of the spar and the opposite rail,
Wolf Larsen came on the scene.  We exchanged nothing more than
good-mornings, and, though he could not see, he sat on the rail out of
the way and followed by the sound all that I did.

Again instructing Maud to slack away at the windlass when I gave the
word, I proceeded to heave on the watch-tackle.  Slowly the mast swung in
until it balanced at right angles across the rail; and then I discovered
to my amazement that there was no need for Maud to slack away.  In fact,
the very opposite was necessary.  Making the watch-tackle fast, I hove on
the windlass and brought in the mast, inch by inch, till its top tilted
down to the deck and finally its whole length lay on the deck.

I looked at my watch.  It was twelve o’clock.  My back was aching sorely,
and I felt extremely tired and hungry.  And there on the deck was a
single stick of timber to show for a whole morning’s work.  For the first
time I thoroughly realized the extent of the task before us.  But I was
learning, I was learning.  The afternoon would show far more
accomplished.  And it did; for we returned at one o’clock, rested and
strengthened by a hearty dinner.

In less than an hour I had the maintopmast on deck and was constructing
the shears.  Lashing the two topmasts together, and making allowance for
their unequal length, at the point of intersection I attached the double
block of the main throat-halyards.  This, with the single block and the
throat-halyards themselves, gave me a hoisting tackle.  To prevent the
butts of the masts from slipping on the deck, I nailed down thick cleats.
Everything in readiness, I made a line fast to the apex of the shears and
carried it directly to the windlass.  I was growing to have faith in that
windlass, for it gave me power beyond all expectation.  As usual, Maud
held the turn while I heaved.  The shears rose in the air.

Then I discovered I had forgotten guy-ropes.  This necessitated my
climbing the shears, which I did twice, before I finished guying it fore
and aft and to either side.  Twilight had set in by the time this was
accomplished.  Wolf Larsen, who had sat about and listened all afternoon
and never opened his mouth, had taken himself off to the galley and
started his supper.  I felt quite stiff across the small of the back, so
much so that I straightened up with an effort and with pain.  I looked
proudly at my work.  It was beginning to show.  I was wild with desire,
like a child with a new toy, to hoist something with my shears.

“I wish it weren’t so late,” I said.  “I’d like to see how it works.”

“Don’t be a glutton, Humphrey,” Maud chided me.  “Remember, to-morrow is
coming, and you’re so tired now that you can hardly stand.”

“And you?” I said, with sudden solicitude.  “You must be very tired.  You
have worked hard and nobly.  I am proud of you, Maud.”

“Not half so proud as I am of you, nor with half the reason,” she
answered, looking me straight in the eyes for a moment with an expression
in her own and a dancing, tremulous light which I had not seen before and
which gave me a pang of quick delight, I know not why, for I did not
understand it.  Then she dropped her eyes, to lift them again, laughing.

“If our friends could see us now,” she said.  “Look at us.  Have you ever
paused for a moment to consider our appearance?”

“Yes, I have considered yours, frequently,” I answered, puzzling over
what I had seen in her eyes and puzzled by her sudden change of subject.

“Mercy!” she cried.  “And what do I look like, pray?”

“A scarecrow, I’m afraid,” I replied.  “Just glance at your draggled
skirts, for instance.  Look at those three-cornered tears.  And such a
waist!  It would not require a Sherlock Holmes to deduce that you have
been cooking over a camp-fire, to say nothing of trying out seal-blubber.
And to cap it all, that cap!  And all that is the woman who wrote ‘A Kiss
Endured.’”

She made me an elaborate and stately courtesy, and said, “As for you,
sir—”

And yet, through the five minutes of banter which followed, there was a
serious something underneath the fun which I could not but relate to the
strange and fleeting expression I had caught in her eyes.  What was it?
Could it be that our eyes were speaking beyond the will of our speech?
My eyes had spoken, I knew, until I had found the culprits out and
silenced them.  This had occurred several times.  But had she seen the
clamour in them and understood?  And had her eyes so spoken to me?  What
else could that expression have meant—that dancing, tremulous light, and
a something more which words could not describe.  And yet it could not
be.  It was impossible.  Besides, I was not skilled in the speech of
eyes.  I was only Humphrey Van Weyden, a bookish fellow who loved.  And
to love, and to wait and win love, that surely was glorious enough for
me.  And thus I thought, even as we chaffed each other’s appearance,
until we arrived ashore and there were other things to think about.

“It’s a shame, after working hard all day, that we cannot have an
uninterrupted night’s sleep,” I complained, after supper.

“But there can be no danger now? from a blind man?” she queried.

“I shall never be able to trust him,” I averred, “and far less now that
he is blind.  The liability is that his part helplessness will make him
more malignant than ever.  I know what I shall do to-morrow, the first
thing—run out a light anchor and kedge the schooner off the beach.  And
each night when we come ashore in the boat, Mr. Wolf Larsen will be left
a prisoner on board.  So this will be the last night we have to stand
watch, and because of that it will go the easier.”

We were awake early and just finishing breakfast as daylight came.

“Oh, Humphrey!” I heard Maud cry in dismay and suddenly stop.

I looked at her.  She was gazing at the _Ghost_.  I followed her gaze,
but could see nothing unusual.  She looked at me, and I looked inquiry
back.

“The shears,” she said, and her voice trembled.

I had forgotten their existence.  I looked again, but could not see them.

“If he has—” I muttered savagely.

She put her hand sympathetically on mine, and said, “You will have to
begin over again.”

“Oh, believe me, my anger means nothing; I could not hurt a fly,” I
smiled back bitterly.  “And the worst of it is, he knows it.  You are
right.  If he has destroyed the shears, I shall do nothing except begin
over again.”

“But I’ll stand my watch on board hereafter,” I blurted out a moment
later.  “And if he interferes—”

“But I dare not stay ashore all night alone,” Maud was saying when I came
back to myself.  “It would be so much nicer if he would be friendly with
us and help us.  We could all live comfortably aboard.”

“We will,” I asserted, still savagely, for the destruction of my beloved
shears had hit me hard.  “That is, you and I will live aboard, friendly
or not with Wolf Larsen.”

“It’s childish,” I laughed later, “for him to do such things, and for me
to grow angry over them, for that matter.”

But my heart smote me when we climbed aboard and looked at the havoc he
had done.  The shears were gone altogether.  The guys had been slashed
right and left.  The throat-halyards which I had rigged were cut across
through every part.  And he knew I could not splice.  A thought struck
me.  I ran to the windlass.  It would not work.  He had broken it.  We
looked at each other in consternation.  Then I ran to the side.  The
masts, booms, and gaffs I had cleared were gone.  He had found the lines
which held them, and cast them adrift.

Tears were in Maud’s eyes, and I do believe they were for me.  I could
have wept myself.  Where now was our project of remasting the _Ghost_?
He had done his work well.  I sat down on the hatch-combing and rested my
chin on my hands in black despair.

“He deserves to die,” I cried out; “and God forgive me, I am not man
enough to be his executioner.”

But Maud was by my side, passing her hand soothingly through my hair as
though I were a child, and saying, “There, there; it will all come right.
We are in the right, and it must come right.”

I remembered Michelet and leaned my head against her; and truly I became
strong again.  The blessed woman was an unfailing fount of power to me.
What did it matter?  Only a set-back, a delay.  The tide could not have
carried the masts far to seaward, and there had been no wind.  It meant
merely more work to find them and tow them back.  And besides, it was a
lesson.  I knew what to expect.  He might have waited and destroyed our
work more effectually when we had more accomplished.

“Here he comes now,” she whispered.

I glanced up.  He was strolling leisurely along the poop on the port
side.

“Take no notice of him,” I whispered.  “He’s coming to see how we take
it.  Don’t let him know that we know.  We can deny him that satisfaction.
Take off your shoes—that’s right—and carry them in your hand.”

And then we played hide-and-seek with the blind man.  As he came up the
port side we slipped past on the starboard; and from the poop we watched
him turn and start aft on our track.

He must have known, somehow, that we were on board, for he said
“Good-morning” very confidently, and waited for the greeting to be
returned.  Then he strolled aft, and we slipped forward.

“Oh, I know you’re aboard,” he called out, and I could see him listen
intently after he had spoken.

It reminded me of the great hoot-owl, listening, after its booming cry,
for the stir of its frightened prey.  But we did not stir, and we moved
only when he moved.  And so we dodged about the deck, hand in hand, like
a couple of children chased by a wicked ogre, till Wolf Larsen, evidently
in disgust, left the deck for the cabin.  There was glee in our eyes, and
suppressed titters in our mouths, as we put on our shoes and clambered
over the side into the boat.  And as I looked into Maud’s clear brown
eyes I forgot the evil he had done, and I knew only that I loved her, and
that because of her the strength was mine to win our way back to the
world.




CHAPTER XXXVI


For two days Maud and I ranged the sea and explored the beaches in search
of the missing masts.  But it was not till the third day that we found
them, all of them, the shears included, and, of all perilous places, in
the pounding surf of the grim south-western promontory.  And how we
worked!  At the dark end of the first day we returned, exhausted, to our
little cove, towing the mainmast behind us.  And we had been compelled to
row, in a dead calm, practically every inch of the way.

Another day of heart-breaking and dangerous toil saw us in camp with the
two topmasts to the good.  The day following I was desperate, and I
rafted together the foremast, the fore and main booms, and the fore and
main gaffs.  The wind was favourable, and I had thought to tow them back
under sail, but the wind baffled, then died away, and our progress with
the oars was a snail’s pace.  And it was such dispiriting effort.  To
throw one’s whole strength and weight on the oars and to feel the boat
checked in its forward lunge by the heavy drag behind, was not exactly
exhilarating.

Night began to fall, and to make matters worse, the wind sprang up ahead.
Not only did all forward motion cease, but we began to drift back and out
to sea.  I struggled at the oars till I was played out.  Poor Maud, whom
I could never prevent from working to the limit of her strength, lay
weakly back in the stern-sheets.  I could row no more.  My bruised and
swollen hands could no longer close on the oar handles.  My wrists and
arms ached intolerably, and though I had eaten heartily of a
twelve-o’clock lunch, I had worked so hard that I was faint from hunger.

I pulled in the oars and bent forward to the line which held the tow.
But Maud’s hand leaped out restrainingly to mine.

“What are you going to do?” she asked in a strained, tense voice.

“Cast it off,” I answered, slipping a turn of the rope.

But her fingers closed on mine.

“Please don’t,” she begged.

“It is useless,” I answered.  “Here is night and the wind blowing us off
the land.”

“But think, Humphrey.  If we cannot sail away on the _Ghost_, we may
remain for years on the island—for life even.  If it has never been
discovered all these years, it may never be discovered.”

“You forget the boat we found on the beach,” I reminded her.

“It was a seal-hunting boat,” she replied, “and you know perfectly well
that if the men had escaped they would have been back to make their
fortunes from the rookery.  You know they never escaped.”

I remained silent, undecided.

“Besides,” she added haltingly, “it’s your idea, and I want to see you
succeed.”

Now I could harden my heart.  As soon as she put it on a flattering
personal basis, generosity compelled me to deny her.

“Better years on the island than to die to-night, or to-morrow, or the
next day, in the open boat.  We are not prepared to brave the sea.  We
have no food, no water, no blankets, nothing.  Why, you’d not survive the
night without blankets: I know how strong you are.  You are shivering
now.”

“It is only nervousness,” she answered.  “I am afraid you will cast off
the masts in spite of me.”

“Oh, please, please, Humphrey, don’t!” she burst out, a moment later.

And so it ended, with the phrase she knew had all power over me.  We
shivered miserably throughout the night.  Now and again I fitfully slept,
but the pain of the cold always aroused me.  How Maud could stand it was
beyond me.  I was too tired to thrash my arms about and warm myself, but
I found strength time and again to chafe her hands and feet to restore
the circulation.  And still she pleaded with me not to cast off the
masts.  About three in the morning she was caught by a cold cramp, and
after I had rubbed her out of that she became quite numb.  I was
frightened.  I got out the oars and made her row, though she was so weak
I thought she would faint at every stroke.

Morning broke, and we looked long in the growing light for our island.
At last it showed, small and black, on the horizon, fully fifteen miles
away.  I scanned the sea with my glasses.  Far away in the south-west I
could see a dark line on the water, which grew even as I looked at it.

“Fair wind!” I cried in a husky voice I did not recognize as my own.

Maud tried to reply, but could not speak.  Her lips were blue with cold,
and she was hollow-eyed—but oh, how bravely her brown eyes looked at me!
How piteously brave!

Again I fell to chafing her hands and to moving her arms up and down and
about until she could thrash them herself.  Then I compelled her to stand
up, and though she would have fallen had I not supported her, I forced
her to walk back and forth the several steps between the thwart and the
stern-sheets, and finally to spring up and down.

“Oh, you brave, brave woman,” I said, when I saw the life coming back
into her face.  “Did you know that you were brave?”

“I never used to be,” she answered.  “I was never brave till I knew you.
It is you who have made me brave.”

“Nor I, until I knew you,” I answered.

She gave me a quick look, and again I caught that dancing, tremulous
light and something more in her eyes.  But it was only for the moment.
Then she smiled.

“It must have been the conditions,” she said; but I knew she was wrong,
and I wondered if she likewise knew.  Then the wind came, fair and fresh,
and the boat was soon labouring through a heavy sea toward the island.
At half-past three in the afternoon we passed the south-western
promontory.  Not only were we hungry, but we were now suffering from
thirst.  Our lips were dry and cracked, nor could we longer moisten them
with our tongues.  Then the wind slowly died down.  By night it was dead
calm and I was toiling once more at the oars—but weakly, most weakly.  At
two in the morning the boat’s bow touched the beach of our own inner cove
and I staggered out to make the painter fast.  Maud could not stand, nor
had I strength to carry her.  I fell in the sand with her, and, when I
had recovered, contented myself with putting my hands under her shoulders
and dragging her up the beach to the hut.

The next day we did no work.  In fact, we slept till three in the
afternoon, or at least I did, for I awoke to find Maud cooking dinner.
Her power of recuperation was wonderful.  There was something tenacious
about that lily-frail body of hers, a clutch on existence which one could
not reconcile with its patent weakness.

“You know I was travelling to Japan for my health,” she said, as we
lingered at the fire after dinner and delighted in the movelessness of
loafing.  “I was not very strong.  I never was.  The doctors recommended
a sea voyage, and I chose the longest.”

“You little knew what you were choosing,” I laughed.

“But I shall be a different women for the experience, as well as a
stronger woman,” she answered; “and, I hope a better woman.  At least I
shall understand a great deal more of life.”

Then, as the short day waned, we fell to discussing Wolf Larsen’s
blindness.  It was inexplicable.  And that it was grave, I instanced his
statement that he intended to stay and die on Endeavour Island.  When he,
strong man that he was, loving life as he did, accepted his death, it was
plain that he was troubled by something more than mere blindness.  There
had been his terrific headaches, and we were agreed that it was some sort
of brain break-down, and that in his attacks he endured pain beyond our
comprehension.

I noticed as we talked over his condition, that Maud’s sympathy went out
to him more and more; yet I could not but love her for it, so sweetly
womanly was it.  Besides, there was no false sentiment about her feeling.
She was agreed that the most rigorous treatment was necessary if we were
to escape, though she recoiled at the suggestion that I might some time
be compelled to take his life to save my own—“our own,” she put it.

In the morning we had breakfast and were at work by daylight.  I found a
light kedge anchor in the fore-hold, where such things were kept; and
with a deal of exertion got it on deck and into the boat.  With a long
running-line coiled down in the stem, I rowed well out into our little
cove and dropped the anchor into the water.  There was no wind, the tide
was high, and the schooner floated.  Casting off the shore-lines, I
kedged her out by main strength (the windlass being broken), till she
rode nearly up and down to the small anchor—too small to hold her in any
breeze.  So I lowered the big starboard anchor, giving plenty of slack;
and by afternoon I was at work on the windlass.

Three days I worked on that windlass.  Least of all things was I a
mechanic, and in that time I accomplished what an ordinary machinist
would have done in as many hours.  I had to learn my tools to begin with,
and every simple mechanical principle which such a man would have at his
finger ends I had likewise to learn.  And at the end of three days I had
a windlass which worked clumsily.  It never gave the satisfaction the old
windlass had given, but it worked and made my work possible.

In half a day I got the two topmasts aboard and the shears rigged and
guyed as before.  And that night I slept on board and on deck beside my
work.  Maud, who refused to stay alone ashore, slept in the forecastle.
Wolf Larsen had sat about, listening to my repairing the windlass and
talking with Maud and me upon indifferent subjects.  No reference was
made on either side to the destruction of the shears; nor did he say
anything further about my leaving his ship alone.  But still I had feared
him, blind and helpless and listening, always listening, and I never let
his strong arms get within reach of me while I worked.

On this night, sleeping under my beloved shears, I was aroused by his
footsteps on the deck.  It was a starlight night, and I could see the
bulk of him dimly as he moved about.  I rolled out of my blankets and
crept noiselessly after him in my stocking feet.  He had armed himself
with a draw-knife from the tool-locker, and with this he prepared to cut
across the throat-halyards I had again rigged to the shears.  He felt the
halyards with his hands and discovered that I had not made them fast.
This would not do for a draw-knife, so he laid hold of the running part,
hove taut, and made fast.  Then he prepared to saw across with the
draw-knife.

“I wouldn’t, if I were you,” I said quietly.

He heard the click of my pistol and laughed.

“Hello, Hump,” he said.  “I knew you were here all the time.  You can’t
fool my ears.”

“That’s a lie, Wolf Larsen,” I said, just as quietly as before.
“However, I am aching for a chance to kill you, so go ahead and cut.”

“You have the chance always,” he sneered.

“Go ahead and cut,” I threatened ominously.

“I’d rather disappoint you,” he laughed, and turned on his heel and went
aft.

“Something must be done, Humphrey,” Maud said, next morning, when I had
told her of the night’s occurrence.  “If he has liberty, he may do
anything.  He may sink the vessel, or set fire to it.  There is no
telling what he may do.  We must make him a prisoner.”

“But how?” I asked, with a helpless shrug.  “I dare not come within reach
of his arms, and he knows that so long as his resistance is passive I
cannot shoot him.”

“There must be some way,” she contended.  “Let me think.”

“There is one way,” I said grimly.

She waited.

I picked up a seal-club.

“It won’t kill him,” I said.  “And before he could recover I’d have him
bound hard and fast.”

She shook her head with a shudder.  “No, not that.  There must be some
less brutal way.  Let us wait.”

But we did not have to wait long, and the problem solved itself.  In the
morning, after several trials, I found the point of balance in the
foremast and attached my hoisting tackle a few feet above it.  Maud held
the turn on the windlass and coiled down while I heaved.  Had the
windlass been in order it would not have been so difficult; as it was, I
was compelled to apply all my weight and strength to every inch of the
heaving.  I had to rest frequently.  In truth, my spells of resting were
longer than those of working.  Maud even contrived, at times when all my
efforts could not budge the windlass, to hold the turn with one hand and
with the other to throw the weight of her slim body to my assistance.

At the end of an hour the single and double blocks came together at the
top of the shears.  I could hoist no more.  And yet the mast was not
swung entirely inboard.  The butt rested against the outside of the port
rail, while the top of the mast overhung the water far beyond the
starboard rail.  My shears were too short.  All my work had been for
nothing.  But I no longer despaired in the old way.  I was acquiring more
confidence in myself and more confidence in the possibilities of
windlasses, shears, and hoisting tackles.  There was a way in which it
could be done, and it remained for me to find that way.

While I was considering the problem, Wolf Larsen came on deck.  We
noticed something strange about him at once.  The indecisiveness, or
feebleness, of his movements was more pronounced.  His walk was actually
tottery as he came down the port side of the cabin.  At the break of the
poop he reeled, raised one hand to his eyes with the familiar brushing
gesture, and fell down the steps—still on his feet—to the main deck,
across which he staggered, falling and flinging out his arms for support.
He regained his balance by the steerage companion-way and stood there
dizzily for a space, when he suddenly crumpled up and collapsed, his legs
bending under him as he sank to the deck.

“One of his attacks,” I whispered to Maud.

She nodded her head; and I could see sympathy warm in her eyes.

We went up to him, but he seemed unconscious, breathing spasmodically.
She took charge of him, lifting his head to keep the blood out of it and
despatching me to the cabin for a pillow.  I also brought blankets, and
we made him comfortable.  I took his pulse.  It beat steadily and strong,
and was quite normal.  This puzzled me.  I became suspicious.

“What if he should be feigning this?” I asked, still holding his wrist.

Maud shook her head, and there was reproof in her eyes.  But just then
the wrist I held leaped from my hand, and the hand clasped like a steel
trap about my wrist.  I cried aloud in awful fear, a wild inarticulate
cry; and I caught one glimpse of his face, malignant and triumphant, as
his other hand compassed my body and I was drawn down to him in a
terrible grip.

My wrist was released, but his other arm, passed around my back, held
both my arms so that I could not move.  His free hand went to my throat,
and in that moment I knew the bitterest foretaste of death earned by
one’s own idiocy.  Why had I trusted myself within reach of those
terrible arms?  I could feel other hands at my throat.  They were Maud’s
hands, striving vainly to tear loose the hand that was throttling me.
She gave it up, and I heard her scream in a way that cut me to the soul,
for it was a woman’s scream of fear and heart-breaking despair.  I had
heard it before, during the sinking of the _Martinez_.

My face was against his chest and I could not see, but I heard Maud turn
and run swiftly away along the deck.  Everything was happening quickly.
I had not yet had a glimmering of unconsciousness, and it seemed that an
interminable period of time was lapsing before I heard her feet flying
back.  And just then I felt the whole man sink under me.  The breath was
leaving his lungs and his chest was collapsing under my weight.  Whether
it was merely the expelled breath, or his consciousness of his growing
impotence, I know not, but his throat vibrated with a deep groan.  The
hand at my throat relaxed.  I breathed.  It fluttered and tightened
again.  But even his tremendous will could not overcome the dissolution
that assailed it.  That will of his was breaking down.  He was fainting.

Maud’s footsteps were very near as his hand fluttered for the last time
and my throat was released.  I rolled off and over to the deck on my
back, gasping and blinking in the sunshine.  Maud was pale but
composed,—my eyes had gone instantly to her face,—and she was looking at
me with mingled alarm and relief.  A heavy seal-club in her hand caught
my eyes, and at that moment she followed my gaze down to it.  The club
dropped from her hand as though it had suddenly stung her, and at the
same moment my heart surged with a great joy.  Truly she was my woman, my
mate-woman, fighting with me and for me as the mate of a caveman would
have fought, all the primitive in her aroused, forgetful of her culture,
hard under the softening civilization of the only life she had ever
known.

“Dear woman!” I cried, scrambling to my feet.

The next moment she was in my arms, weeping convulsively on my shoulder
while I clasped her close.  I looked down at the brown glory of her hair,
glinting gems in the sunshine far more precious to me than those in the
treasure-chests of kings.  And I bent my head and kissed her hair softly,
so softly that she did not know.

Then sober thought came to me.  After all, she was only a woman, crying
her relief, now that the danger was past, in the arms of her protector or
of the one who had been endangered.  Had I been father or brother, the
situation would have been in nowise different.  Besides, time and place
were not meet, and I wished to earn a better right to declare my love.
So once again I softly kissed her hair as I felt her receding from my
clasp.

“It was a real attack this time,” I said: “another shock like the one
that made him blind.  He feigned at first, and in doing so brought it
on.”

Maud was already rearranging his pillow.

“No,” I said, “not yet.  Now that I have him helpless, helpless he shall
remain.  From this day we live in the cabin.  Wolf Larsen shall live in
the steerage.”

I caught him under the shoulders and dragged him to the companion-way.
At my direction Maud fetched a rope.  Placing this under his shoulders, I
balanced him across the threshold and lowered him down the steps to the
floor.  I could not lift him directly into a bunk, but with Maud’s help I
lifted first his shoulders and head, then his body, balanced him across
the edge, and rolled him into a lower bunk.

But this was not to be all.  I recollected the handcuffs in his
state-room, which he preferred to use on sailors instead of the ancient
and clumsy ship irons.  So, when we left him, he lay handcuffed hand and
foot.  For the first time in many days I breathed freely.  I felt
strangely light as I came on deck, as though a weight had been lifted off
my shoulders.  I felt, also, that Maud and I had drawn more closely
together.  And I wondered if she, too, felt it, as we walked along the
deck side by side to where the stalled foremast hung in the shears.




CHAPTER XXXVII


At once we moved aboard the _Ghost_, occupying our old state-rooms and
cooking in the galley.  The imprisonment of Wolf Larsen had happened most
opportunely, for what must have been the Indian summer of this high
latitude was gone and drizzling stormy weather had set in.  We were very
comfortable, and the inadequate shears, with the foremast suspended from
them, gave a business-like air to the schooner and a promise of
departure.

And now that we had Wolf Larsen in irons, how little did we need it!
Like his first attack, his second had been accompanied by serious
disablement.  Maud made the discovery in the afternoon while trying to
give him nourishment.  He had shown signs of consciousness, and she had
spoken to him, eliciting no response.  He was lying on his left side at
the time, and in evident pain.  With a restless movement he rolled his
head around, clearing his left ear from the pillow against which it had
been pressed.  At once he heard and answered her, and at once she came to
me.

Pressing the pillow against his left ear, I asked him if he heard me, but
he gave no sign.  Removing the pillow and, repeating the question he
answered promptly that he did.

“Do you know you are deaf in the right ear?” I asked.

“Yes,” he answered in a low, strong voice, “and worse than that.  My
whole right side is affected.  It seems asleep.  I cannot move arm or
leg.”

“Feigning again?” I demanded angrily.

He shook his head, his stern mouth shaping the strangest, twisted smile.
It was indeed a twisted smile, for it was on the left side only, the
facial muscles of the right side moving not at all.

“That was the last play of the Wolf,” he said.  “I am paralysed.  I shall
never walk again.  Oh, only on the other side,” he added, as though
divining the suspicious glance I flung at his left leg, the knee of which
had just then drawn up, and elevated the blankets.

“It’s unfortunate,” he continued.  “I’d liked to have done for you first,
Hump.  And I thought I had that much left in me.”

“But why?” I asked; partly in horror, partly out of curiosity.

Again his stern mouth framed the twisted smile, as he said:

“Oh, just to be alive, to be living and doing, to be the biggest bit of
the ferment to the end, to eat you.  But to die this way.”

He shrugged his shoulders, or attempted to shrug them, rather, for the
left shoulder alone moved.  Like the smile, the shrug was twisted.

“But how can you account for it?” I asked.  “Where is the seat of your
trouble?”

“The brain,” he said at once.  “It was those cursed headaches brought it
on.”

“Symptoms,” I said.

He nodded his head.  “There is no accounting for it.  I was never sick in
my life.  Something’s gone wrong with my brain.  A cancer, a tumour, or
something of that nature,—a thing that devours and destroys.  It’s
attacking my nerve-centres, eating them up, bit by bit, cell by cell—from
the pain.”

“The motor-centres, too,” I suggested.

“So it would seem; and the curse of it is that I must lie here,
conscious, mentally unimpaired, knowing that the lines are going down,
breaking bit by bit communication with the world.  I cannot see, hearing
and feeling are leaving me, at this rate I shall soon cease to speak; yet
all the time I shall be here, alive, active, and powerless.”

“When you say _you_ are here, I’d suggest the likelihood of the soul,” I
said.

“Bosh!” was his retort.  “It simply means that in the attack on my brain
the higher psychical centres are untouched.  I can remember, I can think
and reason.  When that goes, I go.  I am not.  The soul?”

He broke out in mocking laughter, then turned his left ear to the pillow
as a sign that he wished no further conversation.

Maud and I went about our work oppressed by the fearful fate which had
overtaken him,—how fearful we were yet fully to realize.  There was the
awfulness of retribution about it.  Our thoughts were deep and solemn,
and we spoke to each other scarcely above whispers.

“You might remove the handcuffs,” he said that night, as we stood in
consultation over him.  “It’s dead safe.  I’m a paralytic now.  The next
thing to watch out for is bed sores.”

He smiled his twisted smile, and Maud, her eyes wide with horror, was
compelled to turn away her head.

“Do you know that your smile is crooked?” I asked him; for I knew that
she must attend him, and I wished to save her as much as possible.

“Then I shall smile no more,” he said calmly.  “I thought something was
wrong.  My right cheek has been numb all day.  Yes, and I’ve had warnings
of this for the last three days; by spells, my right side seemed going to
sleep, sometimes arm or hand, sometimes leg or foot.”

“So my smile is crooked?” he queried a short while after.  “Well,
consider henceforth that I smile internally, with my soul, if you please,
my soul.  Consider that I am smiling now.”

And for the space of several minutes he lay there, quiet, indulging his
grotesque fancy.

The man of him was not changed.  It was the old, indomitable, terrible
Wolf Larsen, imprisoned somewhere within that flesh which had once been
so invincible and splendid.  Now it bound him with insentient fetters,
walling his soul in darkness and silence, blocking it from the world
which to him had been a riot of action.  No more would he conjugate the
verb “to do in every mood and tense.”  “To be” was all that remained to
him—to be, as he had defined death, without movement; to will, but not to
execute; to think and reason and in the spirit of him to be as alive as
ever, but in the flesh to be dead, quite dead.

And yet, though I even removed the handcuffs, we could not adjust
ourselves to his condition.  Our minds revolted.  To us he was full of
potentiality.  We knew not what to expect of him next, what fearful
thing, rising above the flesh, he might break out and do.  Our experience
warranted this state of mind, and we went about our work with anxiety
always upon us.

I had solved the problem which had arisen through the shortness of the
shears.  By means of the watch-tackle (I had made a new one), I heaved
the butt of the foremast across the rail and then lowered it to the deck.
Next, by means of the shears, I hoisted the main boom on board.  Its
forty feet of length would supply the height necessary properly to swing
the mast.  By means of a secondary tackle I had attached to the shears, I
swung the boom to a nearly perpendicular position, then lowered the butt
to the deck, where, to prevent slipping, I spiked great cleats around it.
The single block of my original shears-tackle I had attached to the end
of the boom.  Thus, by carrying this tackle to the windlass, I could
raise and lower the end of the boom at will, the butt always remaining
stationary, and, by means of guys, I could swing the boom from side to
side.  To the end of the boom I had likewise rigged a hoisting tackle;
and when the whole arrangement was completed I could not but be startled
by the power and latitude it gave me.

Of course, two days’ work was required for the accomplishment of this
part of my task, and it was not till the morning of the third day that I
swung the foremast from the deck and proceeded to square its butt to fit
the step.  Here I was especially awkward.  I sawed and chopped and
chiselled the weathered wood till it had the appearance of having been
gnawed by some gigantic mouse.  But it fitted.

“It will work, I know it will work,” I cried.

“Do you know Dr. Jordan’s final test of truth?” Maud asked.

I shook my head and paused in the act of dislodging the shavings which
had drifted down my neck.

“Can we make it work?  Can we trust our lives to it? is the test.”

“He is a favourite of yours,” I said.

“When I dismantled my old Pantheon and cast out Napoleon and Cæsar and
their fellows, I straightway erected a new Pantheon,” she answered
gravely, “and the first I installed was Dr. Jordan.”

“A modern hero.”

“And a greater because modern,” she added.  “How can the Old World heroes
compare with ours?”

I shook my head.  We were too much alike in many things for argument.
Our points of view and outlook on life at least were very alike.

“For a pair of critics we agree famously,” I laughed.

“And as shipwright and able assistant,” she laughed back.

But there was little time for laughter in those days, what of our heavy
work and of the awfulness of Wolf Larsen’s living death.

He had received another stroke.  He had lost his voice, or he was losing
it.  He had only intermittent use of it.  As he phrased it, the wires
were like the stock market, now up, now down.  Occasionally the wires
were up and he spoke as well as ever, though slowly and heavily.  Then
speech would suddenly desert him, in the middle of a sentence perhaps,
and for hours, sometimes, we would wait for the connection to be
re-established.  He complained of great pain in his head, and it was
during this period that he arranged a system of communication against the
time when speech should leave him altogether—one pressure of the hand for
“yes,” two for “no.”  It was well that it was arranged, for by evening
his voice had gone from him.  By hand pressures, after that, he answered
our questions, and when he wished to speak he scrawled his thoughts with
his left hand, quite legibly, on a sheet of paper.

The fierce winter had now descended upon us.  Gale followed gale, with
snow and sleet and rain.  The seals had started on their great southern
migration, and the rookery was practically deserted.  I worked
feverishly.  In spite of the bad weather, and of the wind which
especially hindered me, I was on deck from daylight till dark and making
substantial progress.

I profited by my lesson learned through raising the shears and then
climbing them to attach the guys.  To the top of the foremast, which was
just lifted conveniently from the deck, I attached the rigging, stays and
throat and peak halyards.  As usual, I had underrated the amount of work
involved in this portion of the task, and two long days were necessary to
complete it.  And there was so much yet to be done—the sails, for
instance, which practically had to be made over.

While I toiled at rigging the foremast, Maud sewed on canvas, ready
always to drop everything and come to my assistance when more hands than
two were required.  The canvas was heavy and hard, and she sewed with the
regular sailor’s palm and three-cornered sail-needle.  Her hands were
soon sadly blistered, but she struggled bravely on, and in addition doing
the cooking and taking care of the sick man.

“A fig for superstition,” I said on Friday morning.  “That mast goes in
to-day.”

Everything was ready for the attempt.  Carrying the boom-tackle to the
windlass, I hoisted the mast nearly clear of the deck.  Making this
tackle fast, I took to the windlass the shears-tackle (which was
connected with the end of the boom), and with a few turns had the mast
perpendicular and clear.

Maud clapped her hands the instant she was relieved from holding the
turn, crying:

“It works!  It works!  We’ll trust our lives to it!”

Then she assumed a rueful expression.

“It’s not over the hole,” she add.  “Will you have to begin all over?”

I smiled in superior fashion, and, slacking off on one of the boom-guys
and taking in on the other, swung the mast perfectly in the centre of the
deck.  Still it was not over the hole.  Again the rueful expression came
on her face, and again I smiled in a superior way.  Slacking away on the
boom-tackle and hoisting an equivalent amount on the shears-tackle, I
brought the butt of the mast into position directly over the hole in the
deck.  Then I gave Maud careful instructions for lowering away and went
into the hold to the step on the schooner’s bottom.

I called to her, and the mast moved easily and accurately.  Straight
toward the square hole of the step the square butt descended; but as it
descended it slowly twisted so that square would not fit into square.
But I had not even a moment’s indecision.  Calling to Maud to cease
lowering, I went on deck and made the watch-tackle fast to the mast with
a rolling hitch.  I left Maud to pull on it while I went below.  By the
light of the lantern I saw the butt twist slowly around till its sides
coincided with the sides of the step.  Maud made fast and returned to the
windlass.  Slowly the butt descended the several intervening inches, at
the same time slightly twisting again.  Again Maud rectified the twist
with the watch-tackle, and again she lowered away from the windlass.
Square fitted into square.  The mast was stepped.

I raised a shout, and she ran down to see.  In the yellow lantern light
we peered at what we had accomplished.  We looked at each other, and our
hands felt their way and clasped.  The eyes of both of us, I think, were
moist with the joy of success.

“It was done so easily after all,” I remarked.  “All the work was in the
preparation.”

“And all the wonder in the completion,” Maud added.  “I can scarcely
bring myself to realize that that great mast is really up and in; that
you have lifted it from the water, swung it through the air, and
deposited it here where it belongs.  It is a Titan’s task.”

“And they made themselves many inventions,” I began merrily, then paused
to sniff the air.

I looked hastily at the lantern.  It was not smoking.  Again I sniffed.

“Something is burning,” Maud said, with sudden conviction.

We sprang together for the ladder, but I raced past her to the deck.  A
dense volume of smoke was pouring out of the steerage companion-way.

“The Wolf is not yet dead,” I muttered to myself as I sprang down through
the smoke.

It was so thick in the confined space that I was compelled to feel my
way; and so potent was the spell of Wolf Larsen on my imagination, I was
quite prepared for the helpless giant to grip my neck in a strangle hold.
I hesitated, the desire to race back and up the steps to the deck almost
overpowering me.  Then I recollected Maud.  The vision of her, as I had
last seen her, in the lantern light of the schooner’s hold, her brown
eyes warm and moist with joy, flashed before me, and I knew that I could
not go back.

I was choking and suffocating by the time I reached Wolf Larsen’s bunk.
I reached my hand and felt for his.  He was lying motionless, but moved
slightly at the touch of my hand.  I felt over and under his blankets.
There was no warmth, no sign of fire.  Yet that smoke which blinded me
and made me cough and gasp must have a source.  I lost my head
temporarily and dashed frantically about the steerage.  A collision with
the table partially knocked the wind from my body and brought me to
myself.  I reasoned that a helpless man could start a fire only near to
where he lay.

I returned to Wolf Larsen’s bunk.  There I encountered Maud.  How long
she had been there in that suffocating atmosphere I could not guess.

“Go up on deck!” I commanded peremptorily.

“But, Humphrey—” she began to protest in a queer, husky voice.

“Please! please!” I shouted at her harshly.

She drew away obediently, and then I thought, What if she cannot find the
steps?  I started after her, to stop at the foot of the companion-way.
Perhaps she had gone up.  As I stood there, hesitant, I heard her cry
softly:

“Oh, Humphrey, I am lost.”

I found her fumbling at the wall of the after bulkhead, and, half leading
her, half carrying her, I took her up the companion-way.  The pure air
was like nectar.  Maud was only faint and dizzy, and I left her lying on
the deck when I took my second plunge below.

The source of the smoke must be very close to Wolf Larsen—my mind was
made up to this, and I went straight to his bunk.  As I felt about among
his blankets, something hot fell on the back of my hand.  It burned me,
and I jerked my hand away.  Then I understood.  Through the cracks in the
bottom of the upper bunk he had set fire to the mattress.  He still
retained sufficient use of his left arm to do this.  The damp straw of
the mattress, fired from beneath and denied air, had been smouldering all
the while.

As I dragged the mattress out of the bunk it seemed to disintegrate in
mid-air, at the same time bursting into flames.  I beat out the burning
remnants of straw in the bunk, then made a dash for the deck for fresh
air.

Several buckets of water sufficed to put out the burning mattress in the
middle of the steerage floor; and ten minutes later, when the smoke had
fairly cleared, I allowed Maud to come below.  Wolf Larsen was
unconscious, but it was a matter of minutes for the fresh air to restore
him.  We were working over him, however, when he signed for paper and
pencil.

“Pray do not interrupt me,” he wrote.  “I am smiling.”

“I am still a bit of the ferment, you see,” he wrote a little later.

“I am glad you are as small a bit as you are,” I said.

“Thank you,” he wrote.  “But just think of how much smaller I shall be
before I die.”

“And yet I am all here, Hump,” he wrote with a final flourish.  “I can
think more clearly than ever in my life before.  Nothing to disturb me.
Concentration is perfect.  I am all here and more than here.”

It was like a message from the night of the grave; for this man’s body
had become his mausoleum.  And there, in so strange sepulchre, his spirit
fluttered and lived.  It would flutter and live till the last line of
communication was broken, and after that who was to say how much longer
it might continue to flutter and live?




CHAPTER XXXVIII


“I think my left side is going,” Wolf Larsen wrote, the morning after his
attempt to fire the ship.  “The numbness is growing.  I can hardly move
my hand.  You will have to speak louder.  The last lines are going down.”

“Are you in pain?” I asked.

I was compelled to repeat my question loudly before he answered:

“Not all the time.”

The left hand stumbled slowly and painfully across the paper, and it was
with extreme difficulty that we deciphered the scrawl.  It was like a
“spirit message,” such as are delivered at séances of spiritualists for a
dollar admission.

“But I am still here, all here,” the hand scrawled more slowly and
painfully than ever.

The pencil dropped, and we had to replace it in the hand.

“When there is no pain I have perfect peace and quiet.  I have never
thought so clearly.  I can ponder life and death like a Hindoo sage.”

“And immortality?” Maud queried loudly in the ear.

Three times the hand essayed to write but fumbled hopelessly.  The pencil
fell.  In vain we tried to replace it.  The fingers could not close on
it.  Then Maud pressed and held the fingers about the pencil with her own
hand and the hand wrote, in large letters, and so slowly that the minutes
ticked off to each letter:

“B-O-S-H.”

It was Wolf Larsen’s last word, “bosh,” sceptical and invincible to the
end.  The arm and hand relaxed.  The trunk of the body moved slightly.
Then there was no movement.  Maud released the hand.  The fingers spread
slightly, falling apart of their own weight, and the pencil rolled away.

“Do you still hear?” I shouted, holding the fingers and waiting for the
single pressure which would signify “Yes.”  There was no response.  The
hand was dead.

“I noticed the lips slightly move,” Maud said.

I repeated the question.  The lips moved.  She placed the tips of her
fingers on them.  Again I repeated the question.  “Yes,” Maud announced.
We looked at each other expectantly.

“What good is it?” I asked.  “What can we say now?”

“Oh, ask him—”

She hesitated.

“Ask him something that requires no for an answer,” I suggested.  “Then
we will know for certainty.”

“Are you hungry?” she cried.

The lips moved under her fingers, and she answered, “Yes.”

“Will you have some beef?” was her next query.

“No,” she announced.

“Beef-tea?”

“Yes, he will have some beef-tea,” she said, quietly, looking up at me.
“Until his hearing goes we shall be able to communicate with him.  And
after that—”

She looked at me queerly.  I saw her lips trembling and the tears
swimming up in her eyes.  She swayed toward me and I caught her in my
arms.

“Oh, Humphrey,” she sobbed, “when will it all end?  I am so tired, so
tired.”

She buried her head on my shoulder, her frail form shaken with a storm of
weeping.  She was like a feather in my arms, so slender, so ethereal.
“She has broken down at last,” I thought.  “What can I do without her
help?”

But I soothed and comforted her, till she pulled herself bravely together
and recuperated mentally as quickly as she was wont to do physically.

“I ought to be ashamed of myself,” she said.  Then added, with the
whimsical smile I adored, “but I am only one, small woman.”

That phrase, the “one small woman,” startled me like an electric shock.
It was my own phrase, my pet, secret phrase, my love phrase for her.

“Where did you get that phrase?” I demanded, with an abruptness that in
turn startled her.

“What phrase?” she asked.

“One small woman.”

“Is it yours?” she asked.

“Yes,” I answered.  “Mine.  I made it.”

“Then you must have talked in your sleep,” she smiled.

The dancing, tremulous light was in her eyes.  Mine, I knew, were
speaking beyond the will of my speech.  I leaned toward her.  Without
volition I leaned toward her, as a tree is swayed by the wind.  Ah, we
were very close together in that moment.  But she shook her head, as one
might shake off sleep or a dream, saying:

“I have known it all my life.  It was my father’s name for my mother.”

“It is my phrase too,” I said stubbornly.

“For your mother?”

“No,” I answered, and she questioned no further, though I could have
sworn her eyes retained for some time a mocking, teasing expression.

With the foremast in, the work now went on apace.  Almost before I knew
it, and without one serious hitch, I had the mainmast stepped.  A
derrick-boom, rigged to the foremast, had accomplished this; and several
days more found all stays and shrouds in place, and everything set up
taut.  Topsails would be a nuisance and a danger for a crew of two, so I
heaved the topmasts on deck and lashed them fast.

Several more days were consumed in finishing the sails and putting them
on.  There were only three—the jib, foresail, and mainsail; and, patched,
shortened, and distorted, they were a ridiculously ill-fitting suit for
so trim a craft as the _Ghost_.

“But they’ll work!” Maud cried jubilantly.  “We’ll make them work, and
trust our lives to them!”

Certainly, among my many new trades, I shone least as a sail-maker.  I
could sail them better than make them, and I had no doubt of my power to
bring the schooner to some northern port of Japan.  In fact, I had
crammed navigation from text-books aboard; and besides, there was Wolf
Larsen’s star-scale, so simple a device that a child could work it.

As for its inventor, beyond an increasing deafness and the movement of
the lips growing fainter and fainter, there had been little change in his
condition for a week.  But on the day we finished bending the schooner’s
sails, he heard his last, and the last movement of his lips died away—but
not before I had asked him, “Are you all there?” and the lips had
answered, “Yes.”

The last line was down.  Somewhere within that tomb of the flesh still
dwelt the soul of the man.  Walled by the living clay, that fierce
intelligence we had known burned on; but it burned on in silence and
darkness.  And it was disembodied.  To that intelligence there could be
no objective knowledge of a body.  It knew no body.  The very world was
not.  It knew only itself and the vastness and profundity of the quiet
and the dark.




CHAPTER XXXIX


The day came for our departure.  There was no longer anything to detain
us on Endeavour Island.  The _Ghost’s_ stumpy masts were in place, her
crazy sails bent.  All my handiwork was strong, none of it beautiful; but
I knew that it would work, and I felt myself a man of power as I looked
at it.

“I did it!  I did it!  With my own hands I did it!” I wanted to cry
aloud.

But Maud and I had a way of voicing each other’s thoughts, and she said,
as we prepared to hoist the mainsail:

“To think, Humphrey, you did it all with your own hands?”

“But there were two other hands,” I answered.  “Two small hands, and
don’t say that was a phrase, also, of your father.”

She laughed and shook her head, and held her hands up for inspection.

“I can never get them clean again,” she wailed, “nor soften the
weather-beat.”

“Then dirt and weather-beat shall be your guerdon of honour,” I said,
holding them in mine; and, spite of my resolutions, I would have kissed
the two dear hands had she not swiftly withdrawn them.

Our comradeship was becoming tremulous, I had mastered my love long and
well, but now it was mastering me.  Wilfully had it disobeyed and won my
eyes to speech, and now it was winning my tongue—ay, and my lips, for
they were mad this moment to kiss the two small hands which had toiled so
faithfully and hard.  And I, too, was mad.  There was a cry in my being
like bugles calling me to her.  And there was a wind blowing upon me
which I could not resist, swaying the very body of me till I leaned
toward her, all unconscious that I leaned.  And she knew it.  She could
not but know it as she swiftly drew away her hands, and yet, could not
forbear one quick searching look before she turned away her eyes.

By means of deck-tackles I had arranged to carry the halyards forward to
the windlass; and now I hoisted the mainsail, peak and throat, at the
same time.  It was a clumsy way, but it did not take long, and soon the
foresail as well was up and fluttering.

“We can never get that anchor up in this narrow place, once it has left
the bottom,” I said.  “We should be on the rocks first.”

“What can you do?” she asked.

“Slip it,” was my answer.  “And when I do, you must do your first work on
the windlass.  I shall have to run at once to the wheel, and at the same
time you must be hoisting the jib.”

This manœuvre of getting under way I had studied and worked out a score
of times; and, with the jib-halyard to the windlass, I knew Maud was
capable of hoisting that most necessary sail.  A brisk wind was blowing
into the cove, and though the water was calm, rapid work was required to
get us safely out.

When I knocked the shackle-bolt loose, the chain roared out through the
hawse-hole and into the sea.  I raced aft, putting the wheel up.  The
_Ghost_ seemed to start into life as she heeled to the first fill of her
sails.  The jib was rising.  As it filled, the _Ghost’s_ bow swung off
and I had to put the wheel down a few spokes and steady her.

I had devised an automatic jib-sheet which passed the jib across of
itself, so there was no need for Maud to attend to that; but she was
still hoisting the jib when I put the wheel hard down.  It was a moment
of anxiety, for the _Ghost_ was rushing directly upon the beach, a
stone’s throw distant.  But she swung obediently on her heel into the
wind.  There was a great fluttering and flapping of canvas and
reef-points, most welcome to my ears, then she filled away on the other
tack.

Maud had finished her task and come aft, where she stood beside me, a
small cap perched on her wind-blown hair, her cheeks flushed from
exertion, her eyes wide and bright with the excitement, her nostrils
quivering to the rush and bite of the fresh salt air.  Her brown eyes
were like a startled deer’s.  There was a wild, keen look in them I had
never seen before, and her lips parted and her breath suspended as the
_Ghost_, charging upon the wall of rock at the entrance to the inner
cove, swept into the wind and filled away into safe water.

My first mate’s berth on the sealing grounds stood me in good stead, and
I cleared the inner cove and laid a long tack along the shore of the
outer cove.  Once again about, and the _Ghost_ headed out to open sea.
She had now caught the bosom-breathing of the ocean, and was herself
a-breath with the rhythm of it as she smoothly mounted and slipped down
each broad-backed wave.  The day had been dull and overcast, but the sun
now burst through the clouds, a welcome omen, and shone upon the curving
beach where together we had dared the lords of the harem and slain the
holluschickie.  All Endeavour Island brightened under the sun.  Even the
grim south-western promontory showed less grim, and here and there, where
the sea-spray wet its surface, high lights flashed and dazzled in the
sun.

“I shall always think of it with pride,” I said to Maud.

She threw her head back in a queenly way but said, “Dear, dear Endeavour
Island!  I shall always love it.”

“And I,” I said quickly.

It seemed our eyes must meet in a great understanding, and yet, loath,
they struggled away and did not meet.

There was a silence I might almost call awkward, till I broke it, saying:

“See those black clouds to windward.  You remember, I told you last night
the barometer was falling.”

“And the sun is gone,” she said, her eyes still fixed upon our island,
where we had proved our mastery over matter and attained to the truest
comradeship that may fall to man and woman.

“And it’s slack off the sheets for Japan!” I cried gaily.  “A fair wind
and a flowing sheet, you know, or however it goes.”

Lashing the wheel I ran forward, eased the fore and mainsheets, took in
on the boom-tackles and trimmed everything for the quartering breeze
which was ours.  It was a fresh breeze, very fresh, but I resolved to run
as long as I dared.  Unfortunately, when running free, it is impossible
to lash the wheel, so I faced an all-night watch.  Maud insisted on
relieving me, but proved that she had not the strength to steer in a
heavy sea, even if she could have gained the wisdom on such short notice.
She appeared quite heart-broken over the discovery, but recovered her
spirits by coiling down tackles and halyards and all stray ropes.  Then
there were meals to be cooked in the galley, beds to make, Wolf Larsen to
be attended upon, and she finished the day with a grand house-cleaning
attack upon the cabin and steerage.

All night I steered, without relief, the wind slowly and steadily
increasing and the sea rising.  At five in the morning Maud brought me
hot coffee and biscuits she had baked, and at seven a substantial and
piping hot breakfast put new life into me.

Throughout the day, and as slowly and steadily as ever, the wind
increased.  It impressed one with its sullen determination to blow, and
blow harder, and keep on blowing.  And still the _Ghost_ foamed along,
racing off the miles till I was certain she was making at least eleven
knots.  It was too good to lose, but by nightfall I was exhausted.
Though in splendid physical trim, a thirty-six-hour trick at the wheel
was the limit of my endurance.  Besides, Maud begged me to heave to, and
I knew, if the wind and sea increased at the same rate during the night,
that it would soon be impossible to heave to.  So, as twilight deepened,
gladly and at the same time reluctantly, I brought the _Ghost_ up on the
wind.

But I had not reckoned upon the colossal task the reefing of three sails
meant for one man.  While running away from the wind I had not
appreciated its force, but when we ceased to run I learned to my sorrow,
and well-nigh to my despair, how fiercely it was really blowing.  The
wind balked my every effort, ripping the canvas out of my hands and in an
instant undoing what I had gained by ten minutes of severest struggle.
At eight o’clock I had succeeded only in putting the second reef into the
foresail.  At eleven o’clock I was no farther along.  Blood dripped from
every finger-end, while the nails were broken to the quick.  From pain
and sheer exhaustion I wept in the darkness, secretly, so that Maud
should not know.

Then, in desperation, I abandoned the attempt to reef the mainsail and
resolved to try the experiment of heaving to under the close-reefed
foresail.  Three hours more were required to gasket the mainsail and jib,
and at two in the morning, nearly dead, the life almost buffeted and
worked out of me, I had barely sufficient consciousness to know the
experiment was a success.  The close-reefed foresail worked.  The _Ghost_
clung on close to the wind and betrayed no inclination to fall off
broadside to the trough.

I was famished, but Maud tried vainly to get me to eat.  I dozed with my
mouth full of food.  I would fall asleep in the act of carrying food to
my mouth and waken in torment to find the act yet uncompleted.  So
sleepily helpless was I that she was compelled to hold me in my chair to
prevent my being flung to the floor by the violent pitching of the
schooner.

Of the passage from the galley to the cabin I knew nothing.  It was a
sleep-walker Maud guided and supported.  In fact, I was aware of nothing
till I awoke, how long after I could not imagine, in my bunk with my
boots off.  It was dark.  I was stiff and lame, and cried out with pain
when the bed-clothes touched my poor finger-ends.

Morning had evidently not come, so I closed my eyes and went to sleep
again.  I did not know it, but I had slept the clock around and it was
night again.

Once more I woke, troubled because I could sleep no better.  I struck a
match and looked at my watch.  It marked midnight.  And I had not left
the deck until three!  I should have been puzzled had I not guessed the
solution.  No wonder I was sleeping brokenly.  I had slept twenty-one
hours.  I listened for a while to the behaviour of the _Ghost_, to the
pounding of the seas and the muffled roar of the wind on deck, and then
turned over on my side and slept peacefully until morning.

When I arose at seven I saw no sign of Maud and concluded she was in the
galley preparing breakfast.  On deck I found the _Ghost_ doing splendidly
under her patch of canvas.  But in the galley, though a fire was burning
and water boiling, I found no Maud.

I discovered her in the steerage, by Wolf Larsen’s bunk.  I looked at
him, the man who had been hurled down from the topmost pitch of life to
be buried alive and be worse than dead.  There seemed a relaxation of his
expressionless face which was new.  Maud looked at me and I understood.

“His life flickered out in the storm,” I said.

“But he still lives,” she answered, infinite faith in her voice.

“He had too great strength.”

“Yes,” she said, “but now it no longer shackles him.  He is a free
spirit.”

“He is a free spirit surely,” I answered; and, taking her hand, I led her
on deck.

The storm broke that night, which is to say that it diminished as slowly
as it had arisen.  After breakfast next morning, when I had hoisted Wolf
Larsen’s body on deck ready for burial, it was still blowing heavily and
a large sea was running.  The deck was continually awash with the sea
which came inboard over the rail and through the scuppers.  The wind
smote the schooner with a sudden gust, and she heeled over till her lee
rail was buried, the roar in her rigging rising in pitch to a shriek.  We
stood in the water to our knees as I bared my head.

“I remember only one part of the service,” I said, “and that is, ‘And the
body shall be cast into the sea.’”

Maud looked at me, surprised and shocked; but the spirit of something I
had seen before was strong upon me, impelling me to give service to Wolf
Larsen as Wolf Larsen had once given service to another man.  I lifted
the end of the hatch cover and the canvas-shrouded body slipped feet
first into the sea.  The weight of iron dragged it down.  It was gone.

“Good-bye, Lucifer, proud spirit,” Maud whispered, so low that it was
drowned by the shouting of the wind; but I saw the movement of her lips
and knew.

As we clung to the lee rail and worked our way aft, I happened to glance
to leeward.  The _Ghost_, at the moment, was uptossed on a sea, and I
caught a clear view of a small steamship two or three miles away, rolling
and pitching, head on to the sea, as it steamed toward us.  It was
painted black, and from the talk of the hunters of their poaching
exploits I recognized it as a United States revenue cutter.  I pointed it
out to Maud and hurriedly led her aft to the safety of the poop.

I started to rush below to the flag-locker, then remembered that in
rigging the _Ghost_ I had forgotten to make provision for a
flag-halyard.

“We need no distress signal,” Maud said.  “They have only to see us.”

“We are saved,” I said, soberly and solemnly.  And then, in an exuberance
of joy, “I hardly know whether to be glad or not.”

I looked at her.  Our eyes were not loath to meet.  We leaned toward each
other, and before I knew it my arms were about her.

“Need I?” I asked.

And she answered, “There is no need, though the telling of it would be
sweet, so sweet.”

Her lips met the press of mine, and, by what strange trick of the
imagination I know not, the scene in the cabin of the _Ghost_ flashed
upon me, when she had pressed her fingers lightly on my lips and said,
“Hush, hush.”

“My woman, my one small woman,” I said, my free hand petting her shoulder
in the way all lovers know though never learn in school.

“My man,” she said, looking at me for an instant with tremulous lids
which fluttered down and veiled her eyes as she snuggled her head against
my breast with a happy little sigh.

I looked toward the cutter.  It was very close.  A boat was being
lowered.

“One kiss, dear love,” I whispered.  “One kiss more before they come.”

“And rescue us from ourselves,” she completed, with a most adorable
smile, whimsical as I had never seen it, for it was whimsical with love.

Chapter I. Into the Primitive

“Old longings nomadic leap,
Chafing at custom’s chain;
Again from its brumal sleep
Wakens the ferine strain.”


Buck did not read the newspapers, or he would have known that trouble
was brewing, not alone for himself, but for every tide-water dog,
strong of muscle and with warm, long hair, from Puget Sound to San
Diego. Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had found a yellow
metal, and because steamship and transportation companies were booming
the find, thousands of men were rushing into the Northland. These men
wanted dogs, and the dogs they wanted were heavy dogs, with strong
muscles by which to toil, and furry coats to protect them from the
frost.

Buck lived at a big house in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley. Judge
Miller’s place, it was called. It stood back from the road, half hidden
among the trees, through which glimpses could be caught of the wide
cool veranda that ran around its four sides. The house was approached
by gravelled driveways which wound about through wide-spreading lawns
and under the interlacing boughs of tall poplars. At the rear things
were on even a more spacious scale than at the front. There were great
stables, where a dozen grooms and boys held forth, rows of vine-clad
servants’ cottages, an endless and orderly array of outhouses, long
grape arbors, green pastures, orchards, and berry patches. Then there
was the pumping plant for the artesian well, and the big cement tank
where Judge Miller’s boys took their morning plunge and kept cool in
the hot afternoon.

And over this great demesne Buck ruled. Here he was born, and here he
had lived the four years of his life. It was true, there were other
dogs, There could not but be other dogs on so vast a place, but they
did not count. They came and went, resided in the populous kennels, or
lived obscurely in the recesses of the house after the fashion of
Toots, the Japanese pug, or Ysabel, the Mexican hairless,—strange
creatures that rarely put nose out of doors or set foot to ground. On
the other hand, there were the fox terriers, a score of them at least,
who yelped fearful promises at Toots and Ysabel looking out of the
windows at them and protected by a legion of housemaids armed with
brooms and mops.

But Buck was neither house-dog nor kennel-dog. The whole realm was his.
He plunged into the swimming tank or went hunting with the Judge’s
sons; he escorted Mollie and Alice, the Judge’s daughters, on long
twilight or early morning rambles; on wintry nights he lay at the
Judge’s feet before the roaring library fire; he carried the Judge’s
grandsons on his back, or rolled them in the grass, and guarded their
footsteps through wild adventures down to the fountain in the stable
yard, and even beyond, where the paddocks were, and the berry patches.
Among the terriers he stalked imperiously, and Toots and Ysabel he
utterly ignored, for he was king,—king over all creeping, crawling,
flying things of Judge Miller’s place, humans included.

His father, Elmo, a huge St. Bernard, had been the Judge’s inseparable
companion, and Buck bid fair to follow in the way of his father. He was
not so large,—he weighed only one hundred and forty pounds,—for his
mother, Shep, had been a Scotch shepherd dog. Nevertheless, one hundred
and forty pounds, to which was added the dignity that comes of good
living and universal respect, enabled him to carry himself in right
royal fashion. During the four years since his puppyhood he had lived
the life of a sated aristocrat; he had a fine pride in himself, was
even a trifle egotistical, as country gentlemen sometimes become
because of their insular situation. But he had saved himself by not
becoming a mere pampered house-dog. Hunting and kindred outdoor
delights had kept down the fat and hardened his muscles; and to him, as
to the cold-tubbing races, the love of water had been a tonic and a
health preserver.

And this was the manner of dog Buck was in the fall of 1897, when the
Klondike strike dragged men from all the world into the frozen North.
But Buck did not read the newspapers, and he did not know that Manuel,
one of the gardener’s helpers, was an undesirable acquaintance. Manuel
had one besetting sin. He loved to play Chinese lottery. Also, in his
gambling, he had one besetting weakness—faith in a system; and this
made his damnation certain. For to play a system requires money, while
the wages of a gardener’s helper do not lap over the needs of a wife
and numerous progeny.

The Judge was at a meeting of the Raisin Growers’ Association, and the
boys were busy organizing an athletic club, on the memorable night of
Manuel’s treachery. No one saw him and Buck go off through the orchard
on what Buck imagined was merely a stroll. And with the exception of a
solitary man, no one saw them arrive at the little flag station known
as College Park. This man talked with Manuel, and money chinked between
them.

“You might wrap up the goods before you deliver ’m,” the stranger said
gruffly, and Manuel doubled a piece of stout rope around Buck’s neck
under the collar.

“Twist it, an’ you’ll choke ’m plentee,” said Manuel, and the stranger
grunted a ready affirmative.

Buck had accepted the rope with quiet dignity. To be sure, it was an
unwonted performance: but he had learned to trust in men he knew, and
to give them credit for a wisdom that outreached his own. But when the
ends of the rope were placed in the stranger’s hands, he growled
menacingly. He had merely intimated his displeasure, in his pride
believing that to intimate was to command. But to his surprise the rope
tightened around his neck, shutting off his breath. In quick rage he
sprang at the man, who met him halfway, grappled him close by the
throat, and with a deft twist threw him over on his back. Then the rope
tightened mercilessly, while Buck struggled in a fury, his tongue
lolling out of his mouth and his great chest panting futilely. Never in
all his life had he been so vilely treated, and never in all his life
had he been so angry. But his strength ebbed, his eyes glazed, and he
knew nothing when the train was flagged and the two men threw him into
the baggage car.

The next he knew, he was dimly aware that his tongue was hurting and
that he was being jolted along in some kind of a conveyance. The hoarse
shriek of a locomotive whistling a crossing told him where he was. He
had travelled too often with the Judge not to know the sensation of
riding in a baggage car. He opened his eyes, and into them came the
unbridled anger of a kidnapped king. The man sprang for his throat, but
Buck was too quick for him. His jaws closed on the hand, nor did they
relax till his senses were choked out of him once more.

“Yep, has fits,” the man said, hiding his mangled hand from the
baggageman, who had been attracted by the sounds of struggle. “I’m
takin’ ’m up for the boss to ’Frisco. A crack dog-doctor there thinks
that he can cure ’m.”

Concerning that night’s ride, the man spoke most eloquently for
himself, in a little shed back of a saloon on the San Francisco water
front.

“All I get is fifty for it,” he grumbled; “an’ I wouldn’t do it over
for a thousand, cold cash.”

His hand was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief, and the right trouser
leg was ripped from knee to ankle.

“How much did the other mug get?” the saloon-keeper demanded.

“A hundred,” was the reply. “Wouldn’t take a sou less, so help me.”

“That makes a hundred and fifty,” the saloon-keeper calculated; “and
he’s worth it, or I’m a squarehead.”

The kidnapper undid the bloody wrappings and looked at his lacerated
hand. “If I don’t get the hydrophoby—”

“It’ll be because you was born to hang,” laughed the saloon-keeper.
“Here, lend me a hand before you pull your freight,” he added.

Dazed, suffering intolerable pain from throat and tongue, with the life
half throttled out of him, Buck attempted to face his tormentors. But
he was thrown down and choked repeatedly, till they succeeded in filing
the heavy brass collar from off his neck. Then the rope was removed,
and he was flung into a cagelike crate.

There he lay for the remainder of the weary night, nursing his wrath
and wounded pride. He could not understand what it all meant. What did
they want with him, these strange men? Why were they keeping him pent
up in this narrow crate? He did not know why, but he felt oppressed by
the vague sense of impending calamity. Several times during the night
he sprang to his feet when the shed door rattled open, expecting to see
the Judge, or the boys at least. But each time it was the bulging face
of the saloon-keeper that peered in at him by the sickly light of a
tallow candle. And each time the joyful bark that trembled in Buck’s
throat was twisted into a savage growl.

But the saloon-keeper let him alone, and in the morning four men
entered and picked up the crate. More tormentors, Buck decided, for
they were evil-looking creatures, ragged and unkempt; and he stormed
and raged at them through the bars. They only laughed and poked sticks
at him, which he promptly assailed with his teeth till he realized that
that was what they wanted. Whereupon he lay down sullenly and allowed
the crate to be lifted into a wagon. Then he, and the crate in which he
was imprisoned, began a passage through many hands. Clerks in the
express office took charge of him; he was carted about in another
wagon; a truck carried him, with an assortment of boxes and parcels,
upon a ferry steamer; he was trucked off the steamer into a great
railway depot, and finally he was deposited in an express car.

For two days and nights this express car was dragged along at the tail
of shrieking locomotives; and for two days and nights Buck neither ate
nor drank. In his anger he had met the first advances of the express
messengers with growls, and they had retaliated by teasing him. When he
flung himself against the bars, quivering and frothing, they laughed at
him and taunted him. They growled and barked like detestable dogs,
mewed, and flapped their arms and crowed. It was all very silly, he
knew; but therefore the more outrage to his dignity, and his anger
waxed and waxed. He did not mind the hunger so much, but the lack of
water caused him severe suffering and fanned his wrath to fever-pitch.
For that matter, high-strung and finely sensitive, the ill treatment
had flung him into a fever, which was fed by the inflammation of his
parched and swollen throat and tongue.

He was glad for one thing: the rope was off his neck. That had given
them an unfair advantage; but now that it was off, he would show them.
They would never get another rope around his neck. Upon that he was
resolved. For two days and nights he neither ate nor drank, and during
those two days and nights of torment, he accumulated a fund of wrath
that boded ill for whoever first fell foul of him. His eyes turned
blood-shot, and he was metamorphosed into a raging fiend. So changed
was he that the Judge himself would not have recognized him; and the
express messengers breathed with relief when they bundled him off the
train at Seattle.

Four men gingerly carried the crate from the wagon into a small,
high-walled back yard. A stout man, with a red sweater that sagged
generously at the neck, came out and signed the book for the driver.
That was the man, Buck divined, the next tormentor, and he hurled
himself savagely against the bars. The man smiled grimly, and brought a
hatchet and a club.

“You ain’t going to take him out now?” the driver asked.

“Sure,” the man replied, driving the hatchet into the crate for a pry.

There was an instantaneous scattering of the four men who had carried
it in, and from safe perches on top the wall they prepared to watch the
performance.

Buck rushed at the splintering wood, sinking his teeth into it, surging
and wrestling with it. Wherever the hatchet fell on the outside, he was
there on the inside, snarling and growling, as furiously anxious to get
out as the man in the red sweater was calmly intent on getting him out.

“Now, you red-eyed devil,” he said, when he had made an opening
sufficient for the passage of Buck’s body. At the same time he dropped
the hatchet and shifted the club to his right hand.

And Buck was truly a red-eyed devil, as he drew himself together for
the spring, hair bristling, mouth foaming, a mad glitter in his
blood-shot eyes. Straight at the man he launched his one hundred and
forty pounds of fury, surcharged with the pent passion of two days and
nights. In mid air, just as his jaws were about to close on the man, he
received a shock that checked his body and brought his teeth together
with an agonizing clip. He whirled over, fetching the ground on his
back and side. He had never been struck by a club in his life, and did
not understand. With a snarl that was part bark and more scream he was
again on his feet and launched into the air. And again the shock came
and he was brought crushingly to the ground. This time he was aware
that it was the club, but his madness knew no caution. A dozen times he
charged, and as often the club broke the charge and smashed him down.

After a particularly fierce blow, he crawled to his feet, too dazed to
rush. He staggered limply about, the blood flowing from nose and mouth
and ears, his beautiful coat sprayed and flecked with bloody slaver.
Then the man advanced and deliberately dealt him a frightful blow on
the nose. All the pain he had endured was as nothing compared with the
exquisite agony of this. With a roar that was almost lionlike in its
ferocity, he again hurled himself at the man. But the man, shifting the
club from right to left, coolly caught him by the under jaw, at the
same time wrenching downward and backward. Buck described a complete
circle in the air, and half of another, then crashed to the ground on
his head and chest.

For the last time he rushed. The man struck the shrewd blow he had
purposely withheld for so long, and Buck crumpled up and went down,
knocked utterly senseless.

“He’s no slouch at dog-breakin’, that’s wot I say,” one of the men on
the wall cried enthusiastically.

“Druther break cayuses any day, and twice on Sundays,” was the reply of
the driver, as he climbed on the wagon and started the horses.

Buck’s senses came back to him, but not his strength. He lay where he
had fallen, and from there he watched the man in the red sweater.

“‘Answers to the name of Buck,’” the man soliloquized, quoting from the
saloon-keeper’s letter which had announced the consignment of the crate
and contents. “Well, Buck, my boy,” he went on in a genial voice,
“we’ve had our little ruction, and the best thing we can do is to let
it go at that. You’ve learned your place, and I know mine. Be a good
dog and all ’ll go well and the goose hang high. Be a bad dog, and I’ll
whale the stuffin’ outa you. Understand?”

As he spoke he fearlessly patted the head he had so mercilessly
pounded, and though Buck’s hair involuntarily bristled at touch of the
hand, he endured it without protest. When the man brought him water he
drank eagerly, and later bolted a generous meal of raw meat, chunk by
chunk, from the man’s hand.

He was beaten (he knew that); but he was not broken. He saw, once for
all, that he stood no chance against a man with a club. He had learned
the lesson, and in all his after life he never forgot it. That club was
a revelation. It was his introduction to the reign of primitive law,
and he met the introduction halfway. The facts of life took on a
fiercer aspect; and while he faced that aspect uncowed, he faced it
with all the latent cunning of his nature aroused. As the days went by,
other dogs came, in crates and at the ends of ropes, some docilely, and
some raging and roaring as he had come; and, one and all, he watched
them pass under the dominion of the man in the red sweater. Again and
again, as he looked at each brutal performance, the lesson was driven
home to Buck: a man with a club was a lawgiver, a master to be obeyed,
though not necessarily conciliated. Of this last Buck was never guilty,
though he did see beaten dogs that fawned upon the man, and wagged
their tails, and licked his hand. Also he saw one dog, that would
neither conciliate nor obey, finally killed in the struggle for
mastery.

Now and again men came, strangers, who talked excitedly, wheedlingly,
and in all kinds of fashions to the man in the red sweater. And at such
times that money passed between them the strangers took one or more of
the dogs away with them. Buck wondered where they went, for they never
came back; but the fear of the future was strong upon him, and he was
glad each time when he was not selected.

Yet his time came, in the end, in the form of a little weazened man who
spat broken English and many strange and uncouth exclamations which
Buck could not understand.

“Sacredam!” he cried, when his eyes lit upon Buck. “Dat one dam bully
dog! Eh? How moch?”

“Three hundred, and a present at that,” was the prompt reply of the man
in the red sweater. “And seem’ it’s government money, you ain’t got no
kick coming, eh, Perrault?”

Perrault grinned. Considering that the price of dogs had been boomed
skyward by the unwonted demand, it was not an unfair sum for so fine an
animal. The Canadian Government would be no loser, nor would its
despatches travel the slower. Perrault knew dogs, and when he looked at
Buck he knew that he was one in a thousand—“One in ten t’ousand,” he
commented mentally.

Buck saw money pass between them, and was not surprised when Curly, a
good-natured Newfoundland, and he were led away by the little weazened
man. That was the last he saw of the man in the red sweater, and as
Curly and he looked at receding Seattle from the deck of the _Narwhal_,
it was the last he saw of the warm Southland. Curly and he were taken
below by Perrault and turned over to a black-faced giant called
François. Perrault was a French-Canadian, and swarthy; but François was
a French-Canadian half-breed, and twice as swarthy. They were a new
kind of men to Buck (of which he was destined to see many more), and
while he developed no affection for them, he none the less grew
honestly to respect them. He speedily learned that Perrault and
François were fair men, calm and impartial in administering justice,
and too wise in the way of dogs to be fooled by dogs.

In the ’tween-decks of the _Narwhal_, Buck and Curly joined two other
dogs. One of them was a big, snow-white fellow from Spitzbergen who had
been brought away by a whaling captain, and who had later accompanied a
Geological Survey into the Barrens. He was friendly, in a treacherous
sort of way, smiling into one’s face the while he meditated some
underhand trick, as, for instance, when he stole from Buck’s food at
the first meal. As Buck sprang to punish him, the lash of François’s
whip sang through the air, reaching the culprit first; and nothing
remained to Buck but to recover the bone. That was fair of François, he
decided, and the half-breed began his rise in Buck’s estimation.

The other dog made no advances, nor received any; also, he did not
attempt to steal from the newcomers. He was a gloomy, morose fellow,
and he showed Curly plainly that all he desired was to be left alone,
and further, that there would be trouble if he were not left alone.
“Dave” he was called, and he ate and slept, or yawned between times,
and took interest in nothing, not even when the _Narwhal_ crossed Queen
Charlotte Sound and rolled and pitched and bucked like a thing
possessed. When Buck and Curly grew excited, half wild with fear, he
raised his head as though annoyed, favored them with an incurious
glance, yawned, and went to sleep again.

Day and night the ship throbbed to the tireless pulse of the propeller,
and though one day was very like another, it was apparent to Buck that
the weather was steadily growing colder. At last, one morning, the
propeller was quiet, and the _Narwhal_ was pervaded with an atmosphere
of excitement. He felt it, as did the other dogs, and knew that a
change was at hand. François leashed them and brought them on deck. At
the first step upon the cold surface, Buck’s feet sank into a white
mushy something very like mud. He sprang back with a snort. More of
this white stuff was falling through the air. He shook himself, but
more of it fell upon him. He sniffed it curiously, then licked some up
on his tongue. It bit like fire, and the next instant was gone. This
puzzled him. He tried it again, with the same result. The onlookers
laughed uproariously, and he felt ashamed, he knew not why, for it was
his first snow.



Chapter II. The Law of Club and Fang

Buck’s first day on the Dyea beach was like a nightmare. Every hour was
filled with shock and surprise. He had been suddenly jerked from the
heart of civilization and flung into the heart of things primordial. No
lazy, sun-kissed life was this, with nothing to do but loaf and be
bored. Here was neither peace, nor rest, nor a moment’s safety. All was
confusion and action, and every moment life and limb were in peril.
There was imperative need to be constantly alert; for these dogs and
men were not town dogs and men. They were savages, all of them, who
knew no law but the law of club and fang.

He had never seen dogs fight as these wolfish creatures fought, and his
first experience taught him an unforgetable lesson. It is true, it was
a vicarious experience, else he would not have lived to profit by it.
Curly was the victim. They were camped near the log store, where she,
in her friendly way, made advances to a husky dog the size of a
full-grown wolf, though not half so large as she. There was no warning,
only a leap in like a flash, a metallic clip of teeth, a leap out
equally swift, and Curly’s face was ripped open from eye to jaw.

It was the wolf manner of fighting, to strike and leap away; but there
was more to it than this. Thirty or forty huskies ran to the spot and
surrounded the combatants in an intent and silent circle. Buck did not
comprehend that silent intentness, nor the eager way with which they
were licking their chops. Curly rushed her antagonist, who struck again
and leaped aside. He met her next rush with his chest, in a peculiar
fashion that tumbled her off her feet. She never regained them, This
was what the onlooking huskies had waited for. They closed in upon her,
snarling and yelping, and she was buried, screaming with agony, beneath
the bristling mass of bodies.

So sudden was it, and so unexpected, that Buck was taken aback. He saw
Spitz run out his scarlet tongue in a way he had of laughing; and he
saw François, swinging an axe, spring into the mess of dogs. Three men
with clubs were helping him to scatter them. It did not take long. Two
minutes from the time Curly went down, the last of her assailants were
clubbed off. But she lay there limp and lifeless in the bloody,
trampled snow, almost literally torn to pieces, the swart half-breed
standing over her and cursing horribly. The scene often came back to
Buck to trouble him in his sleep. So that was the way. No fair play.
Once down, that was the end of you. Well, he would see to it that he
never went down. Spitz ran out his tongue and laughed again, and from
that moment Buck hated him with a bitter and deathless hatred.

Before he had recovered from the shock caused by the tragic passing of
Curly, he received another shock. François fastened upon him an
arrangement of straps and buckles. It was a harness, such as he had
seen the grooms put on the horses at home. And as he had seen horses
work, so he was set to work, hauling François on a sled to the forest
that fringed the valley, and returning with a load of firewood. Though
his dignity was sorely hurt by thus being made a draught animal, he was
too wise to rebel. He buckled down with a will and did his best, though
it was all new and strange. François was stern, demanding instant
obedience, and by virtue of his whip receiving instant obedience; while
Dave, who was an experienced wheeler, nipped Buck’s hind quarters
whenever he was in error. Spitz was the leader, likewise experienced,
and while he could not always get at Buck, he growled sharp reproof now
and again, or cunningly threw his weight in the traces to jerk Buck
into the way he should go. Buck learned easily, and under the combined
tuition of his two mates and François made remarkable progress. Ere
they returned to camp he knew enough to stop at “ho,” to go ahead at
“mush,” to swing wide on the bends, and to keep clear of the wheeler
when the loaded sled shot downhill at their heels.

“T’ree vair’ good dogs,” François told Perrault. “Dat Buck, heem pool
lak hell. I tich heem queek as anyt’ing.”

By afternoon, Perrault, who was in a hurry to be on the trail with his
despatches, returned with two more dogs. “Billee” and “Joe” he called
them, two brothers, and true huskies both. Sons of the one mother
though they were, they were as different as day and night. Billee’s one
fault was his excessive good nature, while Joe was the very opposite,
sour and introspective, with a perpetual snarl and a malignant eye.
Buck received them in comradely fashion, Dave ignored them, while Spitz
proceeded to thrash first one and then the other. Billee wagged his
tail appeasingly, turned to run when he saw that appeasement was of no
avail, and cried (still appeasingly) when Spitz’s sharp teeth scored
his flank. But no matter how Spitz circled, Joe whirled around on his
heels to face him, mane bristling, ears laid back, lips writhing and
snarling, jaws clipping together as fast as he could snap, and eyes
diabolically gleaming—the incarnation of belligerent fear. So terrible
was his appearance that Spitz was forced to forego disciplining him;
but to cover his own discomfiture he turned upon the inoffensive and
wailing Billee and drove him to the confines of the camp.

By evening Perrault secured another dog, an old husky, long and lean
and gaunt, with a battle-scarred face and a single eye which flashed a
warning of prowess that commanded respect. He was called Sol-leks,
which means the Angry One. Like Dave, he asked nothing, gave nothing,
expected nothing; and when he marched slowly and deliberately into
their midst, even Spitz left him alone. He had one peculiarity which
Buck was unlucky enough to discover. He did not like to be approached
on his blind side. Of this offence Buck was unwittingly guilty, and the
first knowledge he had of his indiscretion was when Sol-leks whirled
upon him and slashed his shoulder to the bone for three inches up and
down. Forever after Buck avoided his blind side, and to the last of
their comradeship had no more trouble. His only apparent ambition, like
Dave’s, was to be left alone; though, as Buck was afterward to learn,
each of them possessed one other and even more vital ambition.

That night Buck faced the great problem of sleeping. The tent,
illumined by a candle, glowed warmly in the midst of the white plain;
and when he, as a matter of course, entered it, both Perrault and
François bombarded him with curses and cooking utensils, till he
recovered from his consternation and fled ignominiously into the outer
cold. A chill wind was blowing that nipped him sharply and bit with
especial venom into his wounded shoulder. He lay down on the snow and
attempted to sleep, but the frost soon drove him shivering to his feet.
Miserable and disconsolate, he wandered about among the many tents,
only to find that one place was as cold as another. Here and there
savage dogs rushed upon him, but he bristled his neck-hair and snarled
(for he was learning fast), and they let him go his way unmolested.

Finally an idea came to him. He would return and see how his own
team-mates were making out. To his astonishment, they had disappeared.
Again he wandered about through the great camp, looking for them, and
again he returned. Were they in the tent? No, that could not be, else
he would not have been driven out. Then where could they possibly be?
With drooping tail and shivering body, very forlorn indeed, he
aimlessly circled the tent. Suddenly the snow gave way beneath his fore
legs and he sank down. Something wriggled under his feet. He sprang
back, bristling and snarling, fearful of the unseen and unknown. But a
friendly little yelp reassured him, and he went back to investigate. A
whiff of warm air ascended to his nostrils, and there, curled up under
the snow in a snug ball, lay Billee. He whined placatingly, squirmed
and wriggled to show his good will and intentions, and even ventured,
as a bribe for peace, to lick Buck’s face with his warm wet tongue.

Another lesson. So that was the way they did it, eh? Buck confidently
selected a spot, and with much fuss and waste effort proceeded to dig a
hole for himself. In a trice the heat from his body filled the confined
space and he was asleep. The day had been long and arduous, and he
slept soundly and comfortably, though he growled and barked and
wrestled with bad dreams.

Nor did he open his eyes till roused by the noises of the waking camp.
At first he did not know where he was. It had snowed during the night
and he was completely buried. The snow walls pressed him on every side,
and a great surge of fear swept through him—the fear of the wild thing
for the trap. It was a token that he was harking back through his own
life to the lives of his forebears; for he was a civilized dog, an
unduly civilized dog, and of his own experience knew no trap and so
could not of himself fear it. The muscles of his whole body contracted
spasmodically and instinctively, the hair on his neck and shoulders
stood on end, and with a ferocious snarl he bounded straight up into
the blinding day, the snow flying about him in a flashing cloud. Ere he
landed on his feet, he saw the white camp spread out before him and
knew where he was and remembered all that had passed from the time he
went for a stroll with Manuel to the hole he had dug for himself the
night before.

A shout from François hailed his appearance. “Wot I say?” the
dog-driver cried to Perrault. “Dat Buck for sure learn queek as
anyt’ing.”

Perrault nodded gravely. As courier for the Canadian Government,
bearing important despatches, he was anxious to secure the best dogs,
and he was particularly gladdened by the possession of Buck.

Three more huskies were added to the team inside an hour, making a
total of nine, and before another quarter of an hour had passed they
were in harness and swinging up the trail toward the Dyea Cañon. Buck
was glad to be gone, and though the work was hard he found he did not
particularly despise it. He was surprised at the eagerness which
animated the whole team and which was communicated to him; but still
more surprising was the change wrought in Dave and Sol-leks. They were
new dogs, utterly transformed by the harness. All passiveness and
unconcern had dropped from them. They were alert and active, anxious
that the work should go well, and fiercely irritable with whatever, by
delay or confusion, retarded that work. The toil of the traces seemed
the supreme expression of their being, and all that they lived for and
the only thing in which they took delight.

Dave was wheeler or sled dog, pulling in front of him was Buck, then
came Sol-leks; the rest of the team was strung out ahead, single file,
to the leader, which position was filled by Spitz.

Buck had been purposely placed between Dave and Sol-leks so that he
might receive instruction. Apt scholar that he was, they were equally
apt teachers, never allowing him to linger long in error, and enforcing
their teaching with their sharp teeth. Dave was fair and very wise. He
never nipped Buck without cause, and he never failed to nip him when he
stood in need of it. As François’s whip backed him up, Buck found it to
be cheaper to mend his ways than to retaliate. Once, during a brief
halt, when he got tangled in the traces and delayed the start, both
Dave and Sol-leks flew at him and administered a sound trouncing. The
resulting tangle was even worse, but Buck took good care to keep the
traces clear thereafter; and ere the day was done, so well had he
mastered his work, his mates about ceased nagging him. François’s whip
snapped less frequently, and Perrault even honored Buck by lifting up
his feet and carefully examining them.

It was a hard day’s run, up the Cañon, through Sheep Camp, past the
Scales and the timber line, across glaciers and snowdrifts hundreds of
feet deep, and over the great Chilcoot Divide, which stands between the
salt water and the fresh and guards forbiddingly the sad and lonely
North. They made good time down the chain of lakes which fills the
craters of extinct volcanoes, and late that night pulled into the huge
camp at the head of Lake Bennett, where thousands of goldseekers were
building boats against the break-up of the ice in the spring. Buck made
his hole in the snow and slept the sleep of the exhausted just, but all
too early was routed out in the cold darkness and harnessed with his
mates to the sled.

That day they made forty miles, the trail being packed; but the next
day, and for many days to follow, they broke their own trail, worked
harder, and made poorer time. As a rule, Perrault travelled ahead of
the team, packing the snow with webbed shoes to make it easier for
them. François, guiding the sled at the gee-pole, sometimes exchanged
places with him, but not often. Perrault was in a hurry, and he prided
himself on his knowledge of ice, which knowledge was indispensable, for
the fall ice was very thin, and where there was swift water, there was
no ice at all.

Day after day, for days unending, Buck toiled in the traces. Always,
they broke camp in the dark, and the first gray of dawn found them
hitting the trail with fresh miles reeled off behind them. And always
they pitched camp after dark, eating their bit of fish, and crawling to
sleep into the snow. Buck was ravenous. The pound and a half of
sun-dried salmon, which was his ration for each day, seemed to go
nowhere. He never had enough, and suffered from perpetual hunger pangs.
Yet the other dogs, because they weighed less and were born to the
life, received a pound only of the fish and managed to keep in good
condition.

He swiftly lost the fastidiousness which had characterized his old
life. A dainty eater, he found that his mates, finishing first, robbed
him of his unfinished ration. There was no defending it. While he was
fighting off two or three, it was disappearing down the throats of the
others. To remedy this, he ate as fast as they; and, so greatly did
hunger compel him, he was not above taking what did not belong to him.
He watched and learned. When he saw Pike, one of the new dogs, a clever
malingerer and thief, slyly steal a slice of bacon when Perrault’s back
was turned, he duplicated the performance the following day, getting
away with the whole chunk. A great uproar was raised, but he was
unsuspected; while Dub, an awkward blunderer who was always getting
caught, was punished for Buck’s misdeed.

This first theft marked Buck as fit to survive in the hostile Northland
environment. It marked his adaptability, his capacity to adjust himself
to changing conditions, the lack of which would have meant swift and
terrible death. It marked, further, the decay or going to pieces of his
moral nature, a vain thing and a handicap in the ruthless struggle for
existence. It was all well enough in the Southland, under the law of
love and fellowship, to respect private property and personal feelings;
but in the Northland, under the law of club and fang, whoso took such
things into account was a fool, and in so far as he observed them he
would fail to prosper.

Not that Buck reasoned it out. He was fit, that was all, and
unconsciously he accommodated himself to the new mode of life. All his
days, no matter what the odds, he had never run from a fight. But the
club of the man in the red sweater had beaten into him a more
fundamental and primitive code. Civilized, he could have died for a
moral consideration, say the defence of Judge Miller’s riding-whip; but
the completeness of his decivilization was now evidenced by his ability
to flee from the defence of a moral consideration and so save his hide.
He did not steal for joy of it, but because of the clamor of his
stomach. He did not rob openly, but stole secretly and cunningly, out
of respect for club and fang. In short, the things he did were done
because it was easier to do them than not to do them.

His development (or retrogression) was rapid. His muscles became hard
as iron, and he grew callous to all ordinary pain. He achieved an
internal as well as external economy. He could eat anything, no matter
how loathsome or indigestible; and, once eaten, the juices of his
stomach extracted the last least particle of nutriment; and his blood
carried it to the farthest reaches of his body, building it into the
toughest and stoutest of tissues. Sight and scent became remarkably
keen, while his hearing developed such acuteness that in his sleep he
heard the faintest sound and knew whether it heralded peace or peril.
He learned to bite the ice out with his teeth when it collected between
his toes; and when he was thirsty and there was a thick scum of ice
over the water hole, he would break it by rearing and striking it with
stiff fore legs. His most conspicuous trait was an ability to scent the
wind and forecast it a night in advance. No matter how breathless the
air when he dug his nest by tree or bank, the wind that later blew
inevitably found him to leeward, sheltered and snug.

And not only did he learn by experience, but instincts long dead became
alive again. The domesticated generations fell from him. In vague ways
he remembered back to the youth of the breed, to the time the wild dogs
ranged in packs through the primeval forest and killed their meat as
they ran it down. It was no task for him to learn to fight with cut and
slash and the quick wolf snap. In this manner had fought forgotten
ancestors. They quickened the old life within him, and the old tricks
which they had stamped into the heredity of the breed were his tricks.
They came to him without effort or discovery, as though they had been
his always. And when, on the still cold nights, he pointed his nose at
a star and howled long and wolflike, it was his ancestors, dead and
dust, pointing nose at star and howling down through the centuries and
through him. And his cadences were their cadences, the cadences which
voiced their woe and what to them was the meaning of the stiffness, and
the cold, and dark.

Thus, as token of what a puppet thing life is, the ancient song surged
through him and he came into his own again; and he came because men had
found a yellow metal in the North, and because Manuel was a gardener’s
helper whose wages did not lap over the needs of his wife and divers
small copies of himself.



Chapter III. The Dominant Primordial Beast

The dominant primordial beast was strong in Buck, and under the fierce
conditions of trail life it grew and grew. Yet it was a secret growth.
His newborn cunning gave him poise and control. He was too busy
adjusting himself to the new life to feel at ease, and not only did he
not pick fights, but he avoided them whenever possible. A certain
deliberateness characterized his attitude. He was not prone to rashness
and precipitate action; and in the bitter hatred between him and Spitz
he betrayed no impatience, shunned all offensive acts.

On the other hand, possibly because he divined in Buck a dangerous
rival, Spitz never lost an opportunity of showing his teeth. He even
went out of his way to bully Buck, striving constantly to start the
fight which could end only in the death of one or the other. Early in
the trip this might have taken place had it not been for an unwonted
accident. At the end of this day they made a bleak and miserable camp
on the shore of Lake Le Barge. Driving snow, a wind that cut like a
white-hot knife, and darkness had forced them to grope for a camping
place. They could hardly have fared worse. At their backs rose a
perpendicular wall of rock, and Perrault and François were compelled to
make their fire and spread their sleeping robes on the ice of the lake
itself. The tent they had discarded at Dyea in order to travel light. A
few sticks of driftwood furnished them with a fire that thawed down
through the ice and left them to eat supper in the dark.

Close in under the sheltering rock Buck made his nest. So snug and warm
was it, that he was loath to leave it when François distributed the
fish which he had first thawed over the fire. But when Buck finished
his ration and returned, he found his nest occupied. A warning snarl
told him that the trespasser was Spitz. Till now Buck had avoided
trouble with his enemy, but this was too much. The beast in him roared.
He sprang upon Spitz with a fury which surprised them both, and Spitz
particularly, for his whole experience with Buck had gone to teach him
that his rival was an unusually timid dog, who managed to hold his own
only because of his great weight and size.

François was surprised, too, when they shot out in a tangle from the
disrupted nest and he divined the cause of the trouble. “A-a-ah!” he
cried to Buck. “Gif it to heem, by Gar! Gif it to heem, the dirty
t’eef!”

Spitz was equally willing. He was crying with sheer rage and eagerness
as he circled back and forth for a chance to spring in. Buck was no
less eager, and no less cautious, as he likewise circled back and forth
for the advantage. But it was then that the unexpected happened, the
thing which projected their struggle for supremacy far into the future,
past many a weary mile of trail and toil.

An oath from Perrault, the resounding impact of a club upon a bony
frame, and a shrill yelp of pain, heralded the breaking forth of
pandemonium. The camp was suddenly discovered to be alive with skulking
furry forms,—starving huskies, four or five score of them, who had
scented the camp from some Indian village. They had crept in while Buck
and Spitz were fighting, and when the two men sprang among them with
stout clubs they showed their teeth and fought back. They were crazed
by the smell of the food. Perrault found one with head buried in the
grub-box. His club landed heavily on the gaunt ribs, and the grub-box
was capsized on the ground. On the instant a score of the famished
brutes were scrambling for the bread and bacon. The clubs fell upon
them unheeded. They yelped and howled under the rain of blows, but
struggled none the less madly till the last crumb had been devoured.

In the meantime the astonished team-dogs had burst out of their nests
only to be set upon by the fierce invaders. Never had Buck seen such
dogs. It seemed as though their bones would burst through their skins.
They were mere skeletons, draped loosely in draggled hides, with
blazing eyes and slavered fangs. But the hunger-madness made them
terrifying, irresistible. There was no opposing them. The team-dogs
were swept back against the cliff at the first onset. Buck was beset by
three huskies, and in a trice his head and shoulders were ripped and
slashed. The din was frightful. Billee was crying as usual. Dave and
Sol-leks, dripping blood from a score of wounds, were fighting bravely
side by side. Joe was snapping like a demon. Once, his teeth closed on
the fore leg of a husky, and he crunched down through the bone. Pike,
the malingerer, leaped upon the crippled animal, breaking its neck with
a quick flash of teeth and a jerk, Buck got a frothing adversary by the
throat, and was sprayed with blood when his teeth sank through the
jugular. The warm taste of it in his mouth goaded him to greater
fierceness. He flung himself upon another, and at the same time felt
teeth sink into his own throat. It was Spitz, treacherously attacking
from the side.

Perrault and François, having cleaned out their part of the camp,
hurried to save their sled-dogs. The wild wave of famished beasts
rolled back before them, and Buck shook himself free. But it was only
for a moment. The two men were compelled to run back to save the grub,
upon which the huskies returned to the attack on the team. Billee,
terrified into bravery, sprang through the savage circle and fled away
over the ice. Pike and Dub followed on his heels, with the rest of the
team behind. As Buck drew himself together to spring after them, out of
the tail of his eye he saw Spitz rush upon him with the evident
intention of overthrowing him. Once off his feet and under that mass of
huskies, there was no hope for him. But he braced himself to the shock
of Spitz’s charge, then joined the flight out on the lake.

Later, the nine team-dogs gathered together and sought shelter in the
forest. Though unpursued, they were in a sorry plight. There was not
one who was not wounded in four or five places, while some were wounded
grievously. Dub was badly injured in a hind leg; Dolly, the last husky
added to the team at Dyea, had a badly torn throat; Joe had lost an
eye; while Billee, the good-natured, with an ear chewed and rent to
ribbons, cried and whimpered throughout the night. At daybreak they
limped warily back to camp, to find the marauders gone and the two men
in bad tempers. Fully half their grub supply was gone. The huskies had
chewed through the sled lashings and canvas coverings. In fact,
nothing, no matter how remotely eatable, had escaped them. They had
eaten a pair of Perrault’s moose-hide moccasins, chunks out of the
leather traces, and even two feet of lash from the end of François’s
whip. He broke from a mournful contemplation of it to look over his
wounded dogs.

“Ah, my frien’s,” he said softly, “mebbe it mek you mad dog, dose many
bites. Mebbe all mad dog, sacredam! Wot you t’ink, eh, Perrault?”

The courier shook his head dubiously. With four hundred miles of trail
still between him and Dawson, he could ill afford to have madness break
out among his dogs. Two hours of cursing and exertion got the harnesses
into shape, and the wound-stiffened team was under way, struggling
painfully over the hardest part of the trail they had yet encountered,
and for that matter, the hardest between them and Dawson.

The Thirty Mile River was wide open. Its wild water defied the frost,
and it was in the eddies only and in the quiet places that the ice held
at all. Six days of exhausting toil were required to cover those thirty
terrible miles. And terrible they were, for every foot of them was
accomplished at the risk of life to dog and man. A dozen times,
Perrault, nosing the way broke through the ice bridges, being saved by
the long pole he carried, which he so held that it fell each time
across the hole made by his body. But a cold snap was on, the
thermometer registering fifty below zero, and each time he broke
through he was compelled for very life to build a fire and dry his
garments.

Nothing daunted him. It was because nothing daunted him that he had
been chosen for government courier. He took all manner of risks,
resolutely thrusting his little weazened face into the frost and
struggling on from dim dawn to dark. He skirted the frowning shores on
rim ice that bent and crackled under foot and upon which they dared not
halt. Once, the sled broke through, with Dave and Buck, and they were
half-frozen and all but drowned by the time they were dragged out. The
usual fire was necessary to save them. They were coated solidly with
ice, and the two men kept them on the run around the fire, sweating and
thawing, so close that they were singed by the flames.

At another time Spitz went through, dragging the whole team after him
up to Buck, who strained backward with all his strength, his fore paws
on the slippery edge and the ice quivering and snapping all around. But
behind him was Dave, likewise straining backward, and behind the sled
was François, pulling till his tendons cracked.

Again, the rim ice broke away before and behind, and there was no
escape except up the cliff. Perrault scaled it by a miracle, while
François prayed for just that miracle; and with every thong and sled
lashing and the last bit of harness rove into a long rope, the dogs
were hoisted, one by one, to the cliff crest. François came up last,
after the sled and load. Then came the search for a place to descend,
which descent was ultimately made by the aid of the rope, and night
found them back on the river with a quarter of a mile to the day’s
credit.

By the time they made the Hootalinqua and good ice, Buck was played
out. The rest of the dogs were in like condition; but Perrault, to make
up lost time, pushed them late and early. The first day they covered
thirty-five miles to the Big Salmon; the next day thirty-five more to
the Little Salmon; the third day forty miles, which brought them well
up toward the Five Fingers.

Buck’s feet were not so compact and hard as the feet of the huskies.
His had softened during the many generations since the day his last
wild ancestor was tamed by a cave-dweller or river man. All day long he
limped in agony, and camp once made, lay down like a dead dog. Hungry
as he was, he would not move to receive his ration of fish, which
François had to bring to him. Also, the dog-driver rubbed Buck’s feet
for half an hour each night after supper, and sacrificed the tops of
his own moccasins to make four moccasins for Buck. This was a great
relief, and Buck caused even the weazened face of Perrault to twist
itself into a grin one morning, when François forgot the moccasins and
Buck lay on his back, his four feet waving appealingly in the air, and
refused to budge without them. Later his feet grew hard to the trail,
and the worn-out foot-gear was thrown away.

At the Pelly one morning, as they were harnessing up, Dolly, who had
never been conspicuous for anything, went suddenly mad. She announced
her condition by a long, heartbreaking wolf howl that sent every dog
bristling with fear, then sprang straight for Buck. He had never seen a
dog go mad, nor did he have any reason to fear madness; yet he knew
that here was horror, and fled away from it in a panic. Straight away
he raced, with Dolly, panting and frothing, one leap behind; nor could
she gain on him, so great was his terror, nor could he leave her, so
great was her madness. He plunged through the wooded breast of the
island, flew down to the lower end, crossed a back channel filled with
rough ice to another island, gained a third island, curved back to the
main river, and in desperation started to cross it. And all the time,
though he did not look, he could hear her snarling just one leap
behind. François called to him a quarter of a mile away and he doubled
back, still one leap ahead, gasping painfully for air and putting all
his faith in that François would save him. The dog-driver held the axe
poised in his hand, and as Buck shot past him the axe crashed down upon
mad Dolly’s head.

Buck staggered over against the sled, exhausted, sobbing for breath,
helpless. This was Spitz’s opportunity. He sprang upon Buck, and twice
his teeth sank into his unresisting foe and ripped and tore the flesh
to the bone. Then François’s lash descended, and Buck had the
satisfaction of watching Spitz receive the worst whipping as yet
administered to any of the teams.

“One devil, dat Spitz,” remarked Perrault. “Some dam day heem keel dat
Buck.”

“Dat Buck two devils,” was François’s rejoinder. “All de tam I watch
dat Buck I know for sure. Lissen: some dam fine day heem get mad lak
hell an’ den heem chew dat Spitz all up an’ spit heem out on de snow.
Sure. I know.”

From then on it was war between them. Spitz, as lead-dog and
acknowledged master of the team, felt his supremacy threatened by this
strange Southland dog. And strange Buck was to him, for of the many
Southland dogs he had known, not one had shown up worthily in camp and
on trail. They were all too soft, dying under the toil, the frost, and
starvation. Buck was the exception. He alone endured and prospered,
matching the husky in strength, savagery, and cunning. Then he was a
masterful dog, and what made him dangerous was the fact that the club
of the man in the red sweater had knocked all blind pluck and rashness
out of his desire for mastery. He was preeminently cunning, and could
bide his time with a patience that was nothing less than primitive.

It was inevitable that the clash for leadership should come. Buck
wanted it. He wanted it because it was his nature, because he had been
gripped tight by that nameless, incomprehensible pride of the trail and
trace—that pride which holds dogs in the toil to the last gasp, which
lures them to die joyfully in the harness, and breaks their hearts if
they are cut out of the harness. This was the pride of Dave as
wheel-dog, of Sol-leks as he pulled with all his strength; the pride
that laid hold of them at break of camp, transforming them from sour
and sullen brutes into straining, eager, ambitious creatures; the pride
that spurred them on all day and dropped them at pitch of camp at
night, letting them fall back into gloomy unrest and uncontent. This
was the pride that bore up Spitz and made him thrash the sled-dogs who
blundered and shirked in the traces or hid away at harness-up time in
the morning. Likewise it was this pride that made him fear Buck as a
possible lead-dog. And this was Buck’s pride, too.

He openly threatened the other’s leadership. He came between him and
the shirks he should have punished. And he did it deliberately. One
night there was a heavy snowfall, and in the morning Pike, the
malingerer, did not appear. He was securely hidden in his nest under a
foot of snow. François called him and sought him in vain. Spitz was
wild with wrath. He raged through the camp, smelling and digging in
every likely place, snarling so frightfully that Pike heard and
shivered in his hiding-place.

But when he was at last unearthed, and Spitz flew at him to punish him,
Buck flew, with equal rage, in between. So unexpected was it, and so
shrewdly managed, that Spitz was hurled backward and off his feet.
Pike, who had been trembling abjectly, took heart at this open mutiny,
and sprang upon his overthrown leader. Buck, to whom fair play was a
forgotten code, likewise sprang upon Spitz. But François, chuckling at
the incident while unswerving in the administration of justice, brought
his lash down upon Buck with all his might. This failed to drive Buck
from his prostrate rival, and the butt of the whip was brought into
play. Half-stunned by the blow, Buck was knocked backward and the lash
laid upon him again and again, while Spitz soundly punished the many
times offending Pike.

In the days that followed, as Dawson grew closer and closer, Buck still
continued to interfere between Spitz and the culprits; but he did it
craftily, when François was not around, With the covert mutiny of Buck,
a general insubordination sprang up and increased. Dave and Sol-leks
were unaffected, but the rest of the team went from bad to worse.
Things no longer went right. There was continual bickering and
jangling. Trouble was always afoot, and at the bottom of it was Buck.
He kept François busy, for the dog-driver was in constant apprehension
of the life-and-death struggle between the two which he knew must take
place sooner or later; and on more than one night the sounds of
quarrelling and strife among the other dogs turned him out of his
sleeping robe, fearful that Buck and Spitz were at it.

But the opportunity did not present itself, and they pulled into Dawson
one dreary afternoon with the great fight still to come. Here were many
men, and countless dogs, and Buck found them all at work. It seemed the
ordained order of things that dogs should work. All day they swung up
and down the main street in long teams, and in the night their jingling
bells still went by. They hauled cabin logs and firewood, freighted up
to the mines, and did all manner of work that horses did in the Santa
Clara Valley. Here and there Buck met Southland dogs, but in the main
they were the wild wolf husky breed. Every night, regularly, at nine,
at twelve, at three, they lifted a nocturnal song, a weird and eerie
chant, in which it was Buck’s delight to join.

With the aurora borealis flaming coldly overhead, or the stars leaping
in the frost dance, and the land numb and frozen under its pall of
snow, this song of the huskies might have been the defiance of life,
only it was pitched in minor key, with long-drawn wailings and
half-sobs, and was more the pleading of life, the articulate travail of
existence. It was an old song, old as the breed itself—one of the first
songs of the younger world in a day when songs were sad. It was
invested with the woe of unnumbered generations, this plaint by which
Buck was so strangely stirred. When he moaned and sobbed, it was with
the pain of living that was of old the pain of his wild fathers, and
the fear and mystery of the cold and dark that was to them fear and
mystery. And that he should be stirred by it marked the completeness
with which he harked back through the ages of fire and roof to the raw
beginnings of life in the howling ages.

Seven days from the time they pulled into Dawson, they dropped down the
steep bank by the Barracks to the Yukon Trail, and pulled for Dyea and
Salt Water. Perrault was carrying despatches if anything more urgent
than those he had brought in; also, the travel pride had gripped him,
and he purposed to make the record trip of the year. Several things
favored him in this. The week’s rest had recuperated the dogs and put
them in thorough trim. The trail they had broken into the country was
packed hard by later journeyers. And further, the police had arranged
in two or three places deposits of grub for dog and man, and he was
travelling light.

They made Sixty Mile, which is a fifty-mile run, on the first day; and
the second day saw them booming up the Yukon well on their way to
Pelly. But such splendid running was achieved not without great trouble
and vexation on the part of François. The insidious revolt led by Buck
had destroyed the solidarity of the team. It no longer was as one dog
leaping in the traces. The encouragement Buck gave the rebels led them
into all kinds of petty misdemeanors. No more was Spitz a leader
greatly to be feared. The old awe departed, and they grew equal to
challenging his authority. Pike robbed him of half a fish one night,
and gulped it down under the protection of Buck. Another night Dub and
Joe fought Spitz and made him forego the punishment they deserved. And
even Billee, the good-natured, was less good-natured, and whined not
half so placatingly as in former days. Buck never came near Spitz
without snarling and bristling menacingly. In fact, his conduct
approached that of a bully, and he was given to swaggering up and down
before Spitz’s very nose.

The breaking down of discipline likewise affected the dogs in their
relations with one another. They quarrelled and bickered more than ever
among themselves, till at times the camp was a howling bedlam. Dave and
Sol-leks alone were unaltered, though they were made irritable by the
unending squabbling. François swore strange barbarous oaths, and
stamped the snow in futile rage, and tore his hair. His lash was always
singing among the dogs, but it was of small avail. Directly his back
was turned they were at it again. He backed up Spitz with his whip,
while Buck backed up the remainder of the team. François knew he was
behind all the trouble, and Buck knew he knew; but Buck was too clever
ever again to be caught red-handed. He worked faithfully in the
harness, for the toil had become a delight to him; yet it was a greater
delight slyly to precipitate a fight amongst his mates and tangle the
traces.

At the mouth of the Tahkeena, one night after supper, Dub turned up a
snowshoe rabbit, blundered it, and missed. In a second the whole team
was in full cry. A hundred yards away was a camp of the Northwest
Police, with fifty dogs, huskies all, who joined the chase. The rabbit
sped down the river, turned off into a small creek, up the frozen bed
of which it held steadily. It ran lightly on the surface of the snow,
while the dogs ploughed through by main strength. Buck led the pack,
sixty strong, around bend after bend, but he could not gain. He lay
down low to the race, whining eagerly, his splendid body flashing
forward, leap by leap, in the wan white moonlight. And leap by leap,
like some pale frost wraith, the snowshoe rabbit flashed on ahead.

All that stirring of old instincts which at stated periods drives men
out from the sounding cities to forest and plain to kill things by
chemically propelled leaden pellets, the blood lust, the joy to
kill—all this was Buck’s, only it was infinitely more intimate. He was
ranging at the head of the pack, running the wild thing down, the
living meat, to kill with his own teeth and wash his muzzle to the eyes
in warm blood.

There is an ecstasy that marks the summit of life, and beyond which
life cannot rise. And such is the paradox of living, this ecstasy comes
when one is most alive, and it comes as a complete forgetfulness that
one is alive. This ecstasy, this forgetfulness of living, comes to the
artist, caught up and out of himself in a sheet of flame; it comes to
the soldier, war-mad on a stricken field and refusing quarter; and it
came to Buck, leading the pack, sounding the old wolf-cry, straining
after the food that was alive and that fled swiftly before him through
the moonlight. He was sounding the deeps of his nature, and of the
parts of his nature that were deeper than he, going back into the womb
of Time. He was mastered by the sheer surging of life, the tidal wave
of being, the perfect joy of each separate muscle, joint, and sinew in
that it was everything that was not death, that it was aglow and
rampant, expressing itself in movement, flying exultantly under the
stars and over the face of dead matter that did not move.

But Spitz, cold and calculating even in his supreme moods, left the
pack and cut across a narrow neck of land where the creek made a long
bend around. Buck did not know of this, and as he rounded the bend, the
frost wraith of a rabbit still flitting before him, he saw another and
larger frost wraith leap from the overhanging bank into the immediate
path of the rabbit. It was Spitz. The rabbit could not turn, and as the
white teeth broke its back in mid air it shrieked as loudly as a
stricken man may shriek. At sound of this, the cry of Life plunging
down from Life’s apex in the grip of Death, the full pack at Buck’s
heels raised a hell’s chorus of delight.

Buck did not cry out. He did not check himself, but drove in upon
Spitz, shoulder to shoulder, so hard that he missed the throat. They
rolled over and over in the powdery snow. Spitz gained his feet almost
as though he had not been overthrown, slashing Buck down the shoulder
and leaping clear. Twice his teeth clipped together, like the steel
jaws of a trap, as he backed away for better footing, with lean and
lifting lips that writhed and snarled.

In a flash Buck knew it. The time had come. It was to the death. As
they circled about, snarling, ears laid back, keenly watchful for the
advantage, the scene came to Buck with a sense of familiarity. He
seemed to remember it all,—the white woods, and earth, and moonlight,
and the thrill of battle. Over the whiteness and silence brooded a
ghostly calm. There was not the faintest whisper of air—nothing moved,
not a leaf quivered, the visible breaths of the dogs rising slowly and
lingering in the frosty air. They had made short work of the snowshoe
rabbit, these dogs that were ill-tamed wolves; and they were now drawn
up in an expectant circle. They, too, were silent, their eyes only
gleaming and their breaths drifting slowly upward. To Buck it was
nothing new or strange, this scene of old time. It was as though it had
always been, the wonted way of things.

Spitz was a practised fighter. From Spitzbergen through the Arctic, and
across Canada and the Barrens, he had held his own with all manner of
dogs and achieved to mastery over them. Bitter rage was his, but never
blind rage. In passion to rend and destroy, he never forgot that his
enemy was in like passion to rend and destroy. He never rushed till he
was prepared to receive a rush; never attacked till he had first
defended that attack.

In vain Buck strove to sink his teeth in the neck of the big white dog.
Wherever his fangs struck for the softer flesh, they were countered by
the fangs of Spitz. Fang clashed fang, and lips were cut and bleeding,
but Buck could not penetrate his enemy’s guard. Then he warmed up and
enveloped Spitz in a whirlwind of rushes. Time and time again he tried
for the snow-white throat, where life bubbled near to the surface, and
each time and every time Spitz slashed him and got away. Then Buck took
to rushing, as though for the throat, when, suddenly drawing back his
head and curving in from the side, he would drive his shoulder at the
shoulder of Spitz, as a ram by which to overthrow him. But instead,
Buck’s shoulder was slashed down each time as Spitz leaped lightly
away.

Spitz was untouched, while Buck was streaming with blood and panting
hard. The fight was growing desperate. And all the while the silent and
wolfish circle waited to finish off whichever dog went down. As Buck
grew winded, Spitz took to rushing, and he kept him staggering for
footing. Once Buck went over, and the whole circle of sixty dogs
started up; but he recovered himself, almost in mid air, and the circle
sank down again and waited.

But Buck possessed a quality that made for greatness—imagination. He
fought by instinct, but he could fight by head as well. He rushed, as
though attempting the old shoulder trick, but at the last instant swept
low to the snow and in. His teeth closed on Spitz’s left fore leg.
There was a crunch of breaking bone, and the white dog faced him on
three legs. Thrice he tried to knock him over, then repeated the trick
and broke the right fore leg. Despite the pain and helplessness, Spitz
struggled madly to keep up. He saw the silent circle, with gleaming
eyes, lolling tongues, and silvery breaths drifting upward, closing in
upon him as he had seen similar circles close in upon beaten
antagonists in the past. Only this time he was the one who was beaten.

There was no hope for him. Buck was inexorable. Mercy was a thing
reserved for gentler climes. He manœuvred for the final rush. The
circle had tightened till he could feel the breaths of the huskies on
his flanks. He could see them, beyond Spitz and to either side, half
crouching for the spring, their eyes fixed upon him. A pause seemed to
fall. Every animal was motionless as though turned to stone. Only Spitz
quivered and bristled as he staggered back and forth, snarling with
horrible menace, as though to frighten off impending death. Then Buck
sprang in and out; but while he was in, shoulder had at last squarely
met shoulder. The dark circle became a dot on the moon-flooded snow as
Spitz disappeared from view. Buck stood and looked on, the successful
champion, the dominant primordial beast who had made his kill and found
it good.



Chapter IV. Who Has Won to Mastership

“Eh? Wot I say? I spik true w’en I say dat Buck two devils.” This was
François’s speech next morning when he discovered Spitz missing and
Buck covered with wounds. He drew him to the fire and by its light
pointed them out.

“Dat Spitz fight lak hell,” said Perrault, as he surveyed the gaping
rips and cuts.

“An’ dat Buck fight lak two hells,” was François’s answer. “An’ now we
make good time. No more Spitz, no more trouble, sure.”

While Perrault packed the camp outfit and loaded the sled, the
dog-driver proceeded to harness the dogs. Buck trotted up to the place
Spitz would have occupied as leader; but François, not noticing him,
brought Sol-leks to the coveted position. In his judgment, Sol-leks was
the best lead-dog left. Buck sprang upon Sol-leks in a fury, driving
him back and standing in his place.

“Eh? eh?” François cried, slapping his thighs gleefully. “Look at dat
Buck. Heem keel dat Spitz, heem t’ink to take de job.”

“Go ’way, Chook!” he cried, but Buck refused to budge.

He took Buck by the scruff of the neck, and though the dog growled
threateningly, dragged him to one side and replaced Sol-leks. The old
dog did not like it, and showed plainly that he was afraid of Buck.
François was obdurate, but when he turned his back Buck again displaced
Sol-leks, who was not at all unwilling to go.

François was angry. “Now, by Gar, I feex you!” he cried, coming back
with a heavy club in his hand.

Buck remembered the man in the red sweater, and retreated slowly; nor
did he attempt to charge in when Sol-leks was once more brought
forward. But he circled just beyond the range of the club, snarling
with bitterness and rage; and while he circled he watched the club so
as to dodge it if thrown by François, for he was become wise in the way
of clubs. The driver went about his work, and he called to Buck when he
was ready to put him in his old place in front of Dave. Buck retreated
two or three steps. François followed him up, whereupon he again
retreated. After some time of this, François threw down the club,
thinking that Buck feared a thrashing. But Buck was in open revolt. He
wanted, not to escape a clubbing, but to have the leadership. It was
his by right. He had earned it, and he would not be content with less.

Perrault took a hand. Between them they ran him about for the better
part of an hour. They threw clubs at him. He dodged. They cursed him,
and his fathers and mothers before him, and all his seed to come after
him down to the remotest generation, and every hair on his body and
drop of blood in his veins; and he answered curse with snarl and kept
out of their reach. He did not try to run away, but retreated around
and around the camp, advertising plainly that when his desire was met,
he would come in and be good.

François sat down and scratched his head. Perrault looked at his watch
and swore. Time was flying, and they should have been on the trail an
hour gone. François scratched his head again. He shook it and grinned
sheepishly at the courier, who shrugged his shoulders in sign that they
were beaten. Then François went up to where Sol-leks stood and called
to Buck. Buck laughed, as dogs laugh, yet kept his distance. François
unfastened Sol-leks’s traces and put him back in his old place. The
team stood harnessed to the sled in an unbroken line, ready for the
trail. There was no place for Buck save at the front. Once more
François called, and once more Buck laughed and kept away.

“T’row down de club,” Perrault commanded.

François complied, whereupon Buck trotted in, laughing triumphantly,
and swung around into position at the head of the team. His traces were
fastened, the sled broken out, and with both men running they dashed
out on to the river trail.

Highly as the dog-driver had forevalued Buck, with his two devils, he
found, while the day was yet young, that he had undervalued. At a bound
Buck took up the duties of leadership; and where judgment was required,
and quick thinking and quick acting, he showed himself the superior
even of Spitz, of whom François had never seen an equal.

But it was in giving the law and making his mates live up to it, that
Buck excelled. Dave and Sol-leks did not mind the change in leadership.
It was none of their business. Their business was to toil, and toil
mightily, in the traces. So long as that were not interfered with, they
did not care what happened. Billee, the good-natured, could lead for
all they cared, so long as he kept order. The rest of the team,
however, had grown unruly during the last days of Spitz, and their
surprise was great now that Buck proceeded to lick them into shape.

Pike, who pulled at Buck’s heels, and who never put an ounce more of
his weight against the breast-band than he was compelled to do, was
swiftly and repeatedly shaken for loafing; and ere the first day was
done he was pulling more than ever before in his life. The first night
in camp, Joe, the sour one, was punished roundly—a thing that Spitz had
never succeeded in doing. Buck simply smothered him by virtue of
superior weight, and cut him up till he ceased snapping and began to
whine for mercy.

The general tone of the team picked up immediately. It recovered its
old-time solidarity, and once more the dogs leaped as one dog in the
traces. At the Rink Rapids two native huskies, Teek and Koona, were
added; and the celerity with which Buck broke them in took away
François’s breath.

“Nevaire such a dog as dat Buck!” he cried. “No, nevaire! Heem worth
one t’ousan’ dollair, by Gar! Eh? Wot you say, Perrault?”

And Perrault nodded. He was ahead of the record then, and gaining day
by day. The trail was in excellent condition, well packed and hard, and
there was no new-fallen snow with which to contend. It was not too
cold. The temperature dropped to fifty below zero and remained there
the whole trip. The men rode and ran by turn, and the dogs were kept on
the jump, with but infrequent stoppages.

The Thirty Mile River was comparatively coated with ice, and they
covered in one day going out what had taken them ten days coming in. In
one run they made a sixty-mile dash from the foot of Lake Le Barge to
the White Horse Rapids. Across Marsh, Tagish, and Bennett (seventy
miles of lakes), they flew so fast that the man whose turn it was to
run towed behind the sled at the end of a rope. And on the last night
of the second week they topped White Pass and dropped down the sea
slope with the lights of Skaguay and of the shipping at their feet.

It was a record run. Each day for fourteen days they had averaged forty
miles. For three days Perrault and François threw chests up and down
the main street of Skaguay and were deluged with invitations to drink,
while the team was the constant centre of a worshipful crowd of
dog-busters and mushers. Then three or four western bad men aspired to
clean out the town, were riddled like pepper-boxes for their pains, and
public interest turned to other idols. Next came official orders.
François called Buck to him, threw his arms around him, wept over him.
And that was the last of François and Perrault. Like other men, they
passed out of Buck’s life for good.

A Scotch half-breed took charge of him and his mates, and in company
with a dozen other dog-teams he started back over the weary trail to
Dawson. It was no light running now, nor record time, but heavy toil
each day, with a heavy load behind; for this was the mail train,
carrying word from the world to the men who sought gold under the
shadow of the Pole.

Buck did not like it, but he bore up well to the work, taking pride in
it after the manner of Dave and Sol-leks, and seeing that his mates,
whether they prided in it or not, did their fair share. It was a
monotonous life, operating with machine-like regularity. One day was
very like another. At a certain time each morning the cooks turned out,
fires were built, and breakfast was eaten. Then, while some broke camp,
others harnessed the dogs, and they were under way an hour or so before
the darkness fell which gave warning of dawn. At night, camp was made.
Some pitched the flies, others cut firewood and pine boughs for the
beds, and still others carried water or ice for the cooks. Also, the
dogs were fed. To them, this was the one feature of the day, though it
was good to loaf around, after the fish was eaten, for an hour or so
with the other dogs, of which there were fivescore and odd. There were
fierce fighters among them, but three battles with the fiercest brought
Buck to mastery, so that when he bristled and showed his teeth they got
out of his way.

Best of all, perhaps, he loved to lie near the fire, hind legs crouched
under him, fore legs stretched out in front, head raised, and eyes
blinking dreamily at the flames. Sometimes he thought of Judge Miller’s
big house in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley, and of the cement
swimming-tank, and Ysabel, the Mexican hairless, and Toots, the
Japanese pug; but oftener he remembered the man in the red sweater, the
death of Curly, the great fight with Spitz, and the good things he had
eaten or would like to eat. He was not homesick. The Sunland was very
dim and distant, and such memories had no power over him. Far more
potent were the memories of his heredity that gave things he had never
seen before a seeming familiarity; the instincts (which were but the
memories of his ancestors become habits) which had lapsed in later
days, and still later, in him, quickened and become alive again.

Sometimes as he crouched there, blinking dreamily at the flames, it
seemed that the flames were of another fire, and that as he crouched by
this other fire he saw another and different man from the half-breed
cook before him. This other man was shorter of leg and longer of arm,
with muscles that were stringy and knotty rather than rounded and
swelling. The hair of this man was long and matted, and his head
slanted back under it from the eyes. He uttered strange sounds, and
seemed very much afraid of the darkness, into which he peered
continually, clutching in his hand, which hung midway between knee and
foot, a stick with a heavy stone made fast to the end. He was all but
naked, a ragged and fire-scorched skin hanging part way down his back,
but on his body there was much hair. In some places, across the chest
and shoulders and down the outside of the arms and thighs, it was
matted into almost a thick fur. He did not stand erect, but with trunk
inclined forward from the hips, on legs that bent at the knees. About
his body there was a peculiar springiness, or resiliency, almost
catlike, and a quick alertness as of one who lived in perpetual fear of
things seen and unseen.

At other times this hairy man squatted by the fire with head between
his legs and slept. On such occasions his elbows were on his knees, his
hands clasped above his head as though to shed rain by the hairy arms.
And beyond that fire, in the circling darkness, Buck could see many
gleaming coals, two by two, always two by two, which he knew to be the
eyes of great beasts of prey. And he could hear the crashing of their
bodies through the undergrowth, and the noises they made in the night.
And dreaming there by the Yukon bank, with lazy eyes blinking at the
fire, these sounds and sights of another world would make the hair to
rise along his back and stand on end across his shoulders and up his
neck, till he whimpered low and suppressedly, or growled softly, and
the half-breed cook shouted at him, “Hey, you Buck, wake up!” Whereupon
the other world would vanish and the real world come into his eyes, and
he would get up and yawn and stretch as though he had been asleep.

It was a hard trip, with the mail behind them, and the heavy work wore
them down. They were short of weight and in poor condition when they
made Dawson, and should have had a ten days’ or a week’s rest at least.
But in two days’ time they dropped down the Yukon bank from the
Barracks, loaded with letters for the outside. The dogs were tired, the
drivers grumbling, and to make matters worse, it snowed every day. This
meant a soft trail, greater friction on the runners, and heavier
pulling for the dogs; yet the drivers were fair through it all, and did
their best for the animals.

Each night the dogs were attended to first. They ate before the drivers
ate, and no man sought his sleeping-robe till he had seen to the feet
of the dogs he drove. Still, their strength went down. Since the
beginning of the winter they had travelled eighteen hundred miles,
dragging sleds the whole weary distance; and eighteen hundred miles
will tell upon life of the toughest. Buck stood it, keeping his mates
up to their work and maintaining discipline, though he, too, was very
tired. Billee cried and whimpered regularly in his sleep each night.
Joe was sourer than ever, and Sol-leks was unapproachable, blind side
or other side.

But it was Dave who suffered most of all. Something had gone wrong with
him. He became more morose and irritable, and when camp was pitched at
once made his nest, where his driver fed him. Once out of the harness
and down, he did not get on his feet again till harness-up time in the
morning. Sometimes, in the traces, when jerked by a sudden stoppage of
the sled, or by straining to start it, he would cry out with pain. The
driver examined him, but could find nothing. All the drivers became
interested in his case. They talked it over at meal-time, and over
their last pipes before going to bed, and one night they held a
consultation. He was brought from his nest to the fire and was pressed
and prodded till he cried out many times. Something was wrong inside,
but they could locate no broken bones, could not make it out.

By the time Cassiar Bar was reached, he was so weak that he was falling
repeatedly in the traces. The Scotch half-breed called a halt and took
him out of the team, making the next dog, Sol-leks, fast to the sled.
His intention was to rest Dave, letting him run free behind the sled.
Sick as he was, Dave resented being taken out, grunting and growling
while the traces were unfastened, and whimpering broken-heartedly when
he saw Sol-leks in the position he had held and served so long. For the
pride of trace and trail was his, and, sick unto death, he could not
bear that another dog should do his work.

When the sled started, he floundered in the soft snow alongside the
beaten trail, attacking Sol-leks with his teeth, rushing against him
and trying to thrust him off into the soft snow on the other side,
striving to leap inside his traces and get between him and the sled,
and all the while whining and yelping and crying with grief and pain.
The half-breed tried to drive him away with the whip; but he paid no
heed to the stinging lash, and the man had not the heart to strike
harder. Dave refused to run quietly on the trail behind the sled, where
the going was easy, but continued to flounder alongside in the soft
snow, where the going was most difficult, till exhausted. Then he fell,
and lay where he fell, howling lugubriously as the long train of sleds
churned by.

With the last remnant of his strength he managed to stagger along
behind till the train made another stop, when he floundered past the
sleds to his own, where he stood alongside Sol-leks. His driver
lingered a moment to get a light for his pipe from the man behind. Then
he returned and started his dogs. They swung out on the trail with
remarkable lack of exertion, turned their heads uneasily, and stopped
in surprise. The driver was surprised, too; the sled had not moved. He
called his comrades to witness the sight. Dave had bitten through both
of Sol-leks’s traces, and was standing directly in front of the sled in
his proper place.

He pleaded with his eyes to remain there. The driver was perplexed. His
comrades talked of how a dog could break its heart through being denied
the work that killed it, and recalled instances they had known, where
dogs, too old for the toil, or injured, had died because they were cut
out of the traces. Also, they held it a mercy, since Dave was to die
anyway, that he should die in the traces, heart-easy and content. So he
was harnessed in again, and proudly he pulled as of old, though more
than once he cried out involuntarily from the bite of his inward hurt.
Several times he fell down and was dragged in the traces, and once the
sled ran upon him so that he limped thereafter in one of his hind legs.

But he held out till camp was reached, when his driver made a place for
him by the fire. Morning found him too weak to travel. At harness-up
time he tried to crawl to his driver. By convulsive efforts he got on
his feet, staggered, and fell. Then he wormed his way forward slowly
toward where the harnesses were being put on his mates. He would
advance his fore legs and drag up his body with a sort of hitching
movement, when he would advance his fore legs and hitch ahead again for
a few more inches. His strength left him, and the last his mates saw of
him he lay gasping in the snow and yearning toward them. But they could
hear him mournfully howling till they passed out of sight behind a belt
of river timber.

Here the train was halted. The Scotch half-breed slowly retraced his
steps to the camp they had left. The men ceased talking. A
revolver-shot rang out. The man came back hurriedly. The whips snapped,
the bells tinkled merrily, the sleds churned along the trail; but Buck
knew, and every dog knew, what had taken place behind the belt of river
trees.



Chapter V. The Toil of Trace and Trail

Thirty days from the time it left Dawson, the Salt Water Mail, with
Buck and his mates at the fore, arrived at Skaguay. They were in a
wretched state, worn out and worn down. Buck’s one hundred and forty
pounds had dwindled to one hundred and fifteen. The rest of his mates,
though lighter dogs, had relatively lost more weight than he. Pike, the
malingerer, who, in his lifetime of deceit, had often successfully
feigned a hurt leg, was now limping in earnest. Sol-leks was limping,
and Dub was suffering from a wrenched shoulder-blade.

They were all terribly footsore. No spring or rebound was left in them.
Their feet fell heavily on the trail, jarring their bodies and doubling
the fatigue of a day’s travel. There was nothing the matter with them
except that they were dead tired. It was not the dead-tiredness that
comes through brief and excessive effort, from which recovery is a
matter of hours; but it was the dead-tiredness that comes through the
slow and prolonged strength drainage of months of toil. There was no
power of recuperation left, no reserve strength to call upon. It had
been all used, the last least bit of it. Every muscle, every fibre,
every cell, was tired, dead tired. And there was reason for it. In less
than five months they had travelled twenty-five hundred miles, during
the last eighteen hundred of which they had had but five days’ rest.
When they arrived at Skaguay they were apparently on their last legs.
They could barely keep the traces taut, and on the down grades just
managed to keep out of the way of the sled.

“Mush on, poor sore feets,” the driver encouraged them as they tottered
down the main street of Skaguay. “Dis is de las’. Den we get one long
res’. Eh? For sure. One bully long res’.”

The drivers confidently expected a long stopover. Themselves, they had
covered twelve hundred miles with two days’ rest, and in the nature of
reason and common justice they deserved an interval of loafing. But so
many were the men who had rushed into the Klondike, and so many were
the sweethearts, wives, and kin that had not rushed in, that the
congested mail was taking on Alpine proportions; also, there were
official orders. Fresh batches of Hudson Bay dogs were to take the
places of those worthless for the trail. The worthless ones were to be
got rid of, and, since dogs count for little against dollars, they were
to be sold.

Three days passed, by which time Buck and his mates found how really
tired and weak they were. Then, on the morning of the fourth day, two
men from the States came along and bought them, harness and all, for a
song. The men addressed each other as “Hal” and “Charles.” Charles was
a middle-aged, lightish-colored man, with weak and watery eyes and a
mustache that twisted fiercely and vigorously up, giving the lie to the
limply drooping lip it concealed. Hal was a youngster of nineteen or
twenty, with a big Colt’s revolver and a hunting-knife strapped about
him on a belt that fairly bristled with cartridges. This belt was the
most salient thing about him. It advertised his callowness—a callowness
sheer and unutterable. Both men were manifestly out of place, and why
such as they should adventure the North is part of the mystery of
things that passes understanding.

Buck heard the chaffering, saw the money pass between the man and the
Government agent, and knew that the Scotch half-breed and the
mail-train drivers were passing out of his life on the heels of
Perrault and François and the others who had gone before. When driven
with his mates to the new owners’ camp, Buck saw a slipshod and
slovenly affair, tent half stretched, dishes unwashed, everything in
disorder; also, he saw a woman. “Mercedes” the men called her. She was
Charles’s wife and Hal’s sister—a nice family party.

Buck watched them apprehensively as they proceeded to take down the
tent and load the sled. There was a great deal of effort about their
manner, but no businesslike method. The tent was rolled into an awkward
bundle three times as large as it should have been. The tin dishes were
packed away unwashed. Mercedes continually fluttered in the way of her
men and kept up an unbroken chattering of remonstrance and advice. When
they put a clothes-sack on the front of the sled, she suggested it
should go on the back; and when they had put it on the back, and
covered it over with a couple of other bundles, she discovered
overlooked articles which could abide nowhere else but in that very
sack, and they unloaded again.

Three men from a neighboring tent came out and looked on, grinning and
winking at one another.

“You’ve got a right smart load as it is,” said one of them; “and it’s
not me should tell you your business, but I wouldn’t tote that tent
along if I was you.”

“Undreamed of!” cried Mercedes, throwing up her hands in dainty dismay.
“However in the world could I manage without a tent?”

“It’s springtime, and you won’t get any more cold weather,” the man
replied.

She shook her head decidedly, and Charles and Hal put the last odds and
ends on top the mountainous load.

“Think it’ll ride?” one of the men asked.

“Why shouldn’t it?” Charles demanded rather shortly.

“Oh, that’s all right, that’s all right,” the man hastened meekly to
say. “I was just a-wonderin’, that is all. It seemed a mite top-heavy.”

Charles turned his back and drew the lashings down as well as he could,
which was not in the least well.

“An’ of course the dogs can hike along all day with that contraption
behind them,” affirmed a second of the men.

“Certainly,” said Hal, with freezing politeness, taking hold of the
gee-pole with one hand and swinging his whip from the other. “Mush!” he
shouted. “Mush on there!”

The dogs sprang against the breast-bands, strained hard for a few
moments, then relaxed. They were unable to move the sled.

“The lazy brutes, I’ll show them,” he cried, preparing to lash out at
them with the whip.

But Mercedes interfered, crying, “Oh, Hal, you mustn’t,” as she caught
hold of the whip and wrenched it from him. “The poor dears! Now you
must promise you won’t be harsh with them for the rest of the trip, or
I won’t go a step.”

“Precious lot you know about dogs,” her brother sneered; “and I wish
you’d leave me alone. They’re lazy, I tell you, and you’ve got to whip
them to get anything out of them. That’s their way. You ask any one.
Ask one of those men.”

Mercedes looked at them imploringly, untold repugnance at sight of pain
written in her pretty face.

“They’re weak as water, if you want to know,” came the reply from one
of the men. “Plum tuckered out, that’s what’s the matter. They need a
rest.”

“Rest be blanked,” said Hal, with his beardless lips; and Mercedes
said, “Oh!” in pain and sorrow at the oath.

But she was a clannish creature, and rushed at once to the defence of
her brother. “Never mind that man,” she said pointedly. “You’re driving
our dogs, and you do what you think best with them.”

Again Hal’s whip fell upon the dogs. They threw themselves against the
breast-bands, dug their feet into the packed snow, got down low to it,
and put forth all their strength. The sled held as though it were an
anchor. After two efforts, they stood still, panting. The whip was
whistling savagely, when once more Mercedes interfered. She dropped on
her knees before Buck, with tears in her eyes, and put her arms around
his neck.

“You poor, poor dears,” she cried sympathetically, “why don’t you pull
hard?—then you wouldn’t be whipped.” Buck did not like her, but he was
feeling too miserable to resist her, taking it as part of the day’s
miserable work.

One of the onlookers, who had been clenching his teeth to suppress hot
speech, now spoke up:—

“It’s not that I care a whoop what becomes of you, but for the dogs’
sakes I just want to tell you, you can help them a mighty lot by
breaking out that sled. The runners are froze fast. Throw your weight
against the gee-pole, right and left, and break it out.”

A third time the attempt was made, but this time, following the advice,
Hal broke out the runners which had been frozen to the snow. The
overloaded and unwieldy sled forged ahead, Buck and his mates
struggling frantically under the rain of blows. A hundred yards ahead
the path turned and sloped steeply into the main street. It would have
required an experienced man to keep the top-heavy sled upright, and Hal
was not such a man. As they swung on the turn the sled went over,
spilling half its load through the loose lashings. The dogs never
stopped. The lightened sled bounded on its side behind them. They were
angry because of the ill treatment they had received and the unjust
load. Buck was raging. He broke into a run, the team following his
lead. Hal cried “Whoa! whoa!” but they gave no heed. He tripped and was
pulled off his feet. The capsized sled ground over him, and the dogs
dashed on up the street, adding to the gayety of Skaguay as they
scattered the remainder of the outfit along its chief thoroughfare.

Kind-hearted citizens caught the dogs and gathered up the scattered
belongings. Also, they gave advice. Half the load and twice the dogs,
if they ever expected to reach Dawson, was what was said. Hal and his
sister and brother-in-law listened unwillingly, pitched tent, and
overhauled the outfit. Canned goods were turned out that made men
laugh, for canned goods on the Long Trail is a thing to dream about.
“Blankets for a hotel” quoth one of the men who laughed and helped.
“Half as many is too much; get rid of them. Throw away that tent, and
all those dishes,—who’s going to wash them, anyway? Good Lord, do you
think you’re travelling on a Pullman?”

And so it went, the inexorable elimination of the superfluous. Mercedes
cried when her clothes-bags were dumped on the ground and article after
article was thrown out. She cried in general, and she cried in
particular over each discarded thing. She clasped hands about knees,
rocking back and forth broken-heartedly. She averred she would not go
an inch, not for a dozen Charleses. She appealed to everybody and to
everything, finally wiping her eyes and proceeding to cast out even
articles of apparel that were imperative necessaries. And in her zeal,
when she had finished with her own, she attacked the belongings of her
men and went through them like a tornado.

This accomplished, the outfit, though cut in half, was still a
formidable bulk. Charles and Hal went out in the evening and bought six
Outside dogs. These, added to the six of the original team, and Teek
and Koona, the huskies obtained at the Rink Rapids on the record trip,
brought the team up to fourteen. But the Outside dogs, though
practically broken in since their landing, did not amount to much.
Three were short-haired pointers, one was a Newfoundland, and the other
two were mongrels of indeterminate breed. They did not seem to know
anything, these newcomers. Buck and his comrades looked upon them with
disgust, and though he speedily taught them their places and what not
to do, he could not teach them what to do. They did not take kindly to
trace and trail. With the exception of the two mongrels, they were
bewildered and spirit-broken by the strange savage environment in which
they found themselves and by the ill treatment they had received. The
two mongrels were without spirit at all; bones were the only things
breakable about them.

With the newcomers hopeless and forlorn, and the old team worn out by
twenty-five hundred miles of continuous trail, the outlook was anything
but bright. The two men, however, were quite cheerful. And they were
proud, too. They were doing the thing in style, with fourteen dogs.
They had seen other sleds depart over the Pass for Dawson, or come in
from Dawson, but never had they seen a sled with so many as fourteen
dogs. In the nature of Arctic travel there was a reason why fourteen
dogs should not drag one sled, and that was that one sled could not
carry the food for fourteen dogs. But Charles and Hal did not know
this. They had worked the trip out with a pencil, so much to a dog, so
many dogs, so many days, Q.E.D. Mercedes looked over their shoulders
and nodded comprehensively, it was all so very simple.

Late next morning Buck led the long team up the street. There was
nothing lively about it, no snap or go in him and his fellows. They
were starting dead weary. Four times he had covered the distance
between Salt Water and Dawson, and the knowledge that, jaded and tired,
he was facing the same trail once more, made him bitter. His heart was
not in the work, nor was the heart of any dog. The Outsides were timid
and frightened, the Insides without confidence in their masters.

Buck felt vaguely that there was no depending upon these two men and
the woman. They did not know how to do anything, and as the days went
by it became apparent that they could not learn. They were slack in all
things, without order or discipline. It took them half the night to
pitch a slovenly camp, and half the morning to break that camp and get
the sled loaded in fashion so slovenly that for the rest of the day
they were occupied in stopping and rearranging the load. Some days they
did not make ten miles. On other days they were unable to get started
at all. And on no day did they succeed in making more than half the
distance used by the men as a basis in their dog-food computation.

It was inevitable that they should go short on dog-food. But they
hastened it by overfeeding, bringing the day nearer when underfeeding
would commence. The Outside dogs, whose digestions had not been trained
by chronic famine to make the most of little, had voracious appetites.
And when, in addition to this, the worn-out huskies pulled weakly, Hal
decided that the orthodox ration was too small. He doubled it. And to
cap it all, when Mercedes, with tears in her pretty eyes and a quaver
in her throat, could not cajole him into giving the dogs still more,
she stole from the fish-sacks and fed them slyly. But it was not food
that Buck and the huskies needed, but rest. And though they were making
poor time, the heavy load they dragged sapped their strength severely.

Then came the underfeeding. Hal awoke one day to the fact that his
dog-food was half gone and the distance only quarter covered; further,
that for love or money no additional dog-food was to be obtained. So he
cut down even the orthodox ration and tried to increase the day’s
travel. His sister and brother-in-law seconded him; but they were
frustrated by their heavy outfit and their own incompetence. It was a
simple matter to give the dogs less food; but it was impossible to make
the dogs travel faster, while their own inability to get under way
earlier in the morning prevented them from travelling longer hours. Not
only did they not know how to work dogs, but they did not know how to
work themselves.

The first to go was Dub. Poor blundering thief that he was, always
getting caught and punished, he had none the less been a faithful
worker. His wrenched shoulder-blade, untreated and unrested, went from
bad to worse, till finally Hal shot him with the big Colt’s revolver.
It is a saying of the country that an Outside dog starves to death on
the ration of the husky, so the six Outside dogs under Buck could do no
less than die on half the ration of the husky. The Newfoundland went
first, followed by the three short-haired pointers, the two mongrels
hanging more grittily on to life, but going in the end.

By this time all the amenities and gentlenesses of the Southland had
fallen away from the three people. Shorn of its glamour and romance,
Arctic travel became to them a reality too harsh for their manhood and
womanhood. Mercedes ceased weeping over the dogs, being too occupied
with weeping over herself and with quarrelling with her husband and
brother. To quarrel was the one thing they were never too weary to do.
Their irritability arose out of their misery, increased with it,
doubled upon it, outdistanced it. The wonderful patience of the trail
which comes to men who toil hard and suffer sore, and remain sweet of
speech and kindly, did not come to these two men and the woman. They
had no inkling of such a patience. They were stiff and in pain; their
muscles ached, their bones ached, their very hearts ached; and because
of this they became sharp of speech, and hard words were first on their
lips in the morning and last at night.

Charles and Hal wrangled whenever Mercedes gave them a chance. It was
the cherished belief of each that he did more than his share of the
work, and neither forbore to speak this belief at every opportunity.
Sometimes Mercedes sided with her husband, sometimes with her brother.
The result was a beautiful and unending family quarrel. Starting from a
dispute as to which should chop a few sticks for the fire (a dispute
which concerned only Charles and Hal), presently would be lugged in the
rest of the family, fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins, people thousands
of miles away, and some of them dead. That Hal’s views on art, or the
sort of society plays his mother’s brother wrote, should have anything
to do with the chopping of a few sticks of firewood, passes
comprehension; nevertheless the quarrel was as likely to tend in that
direction as in the direction of Charles’s political prejudices. And
that Charles’s sister’s tale-bearing tongue should be relevant to the
building of a Yukon fire, was apparent only to Mercedes, who
disburdened herself of copious opinions upon that topic, and
incidentally upon a few other traits unpleasantly peculiar to her
husband’s family. In the meantime the fire remained unbuilt, the camp
half pitched, and the dogs unfed.

Mercedes nursed a special grievance—the grievance of sex. She was
pretty and soft, and had been chivalrously treated all her days. But
the present treatment by her husband and brother was everything save
chivalrous. It was her custom to be helpless. They complained. Upon
which impeachment of what to her was her most essential
sex-prerogative, she made their lives unendurable. She no longer
considered the dogs, and because she was sore and tired, she persisted
in riding on the sled. She was pretty and soft, but she weighed one
hundred and twenty pounds—a lusty last straw to the load dragged by the
weak and starving animals. She rode for days, till they fell in the
traces and the sled stood still. Charles and Hal begged her to get off
and walk, pleaded with her, entreated, the while she wept and
importuned Heaven with a recital of their brutality.

On one occasion they took her off the sled by main strength. They never
did it again. She let her legs go limp like a spoiled child, and sat
down on the trail. They went on their way, but she did not move. After
they had travelled three miles they unloaded the sled, came back for
her, and by main strength put her on the sled again.

In the excess of their own misery they were callous to the suffering of
their animals. Hal’s theory, which he practised on others, was that one
must get hardened. He had started out preaching it to his sister and
brother-in-law. Failing there, he hammered it into the dogs with a
club. At the Five Fingers the dog-food gave out, and a toothless old
squaw offered to trade them a few pounds of frozen horse-hide for the
Colt’s revolver that kept the big hunting-knife company at Hal’s hip. A
poor substitute for food was this hide, just as it had been stripped
from the starved horses of the cattlemen six months back. In its frozen
state it was more like strips of galvanized iron, and when a dog
wrestled it into his stomach it thawed into thin and innutritious
leathery strings and into a mass of short hair, irritating and
indigestible.

And through it all Buck staggered along at the head of the team as in a
nightmare. He pulled when he could; when he could no longer pull, he
fell down and remained down till blows from whip or club drove him to
his feet again. All the stiffness and gloss had gone out of his
beautiful furry coat. The hair hung down, limp and draggled, or matted
with dried blood where Hal’s club had bruised him. His muscles had
wasted away to knotty strings, and the flesh pads had disappeared, so
that each rib and every bone in his frame were outlined cleanly through
the loose hide that was wrinkled in folds of emptiness. It was
heartbreaking, only Buck’s heart was unbreakable. The man in the red
sweater had proved that.

As it was with Buck, so was it with his mates. They were perambulating
skeletons. There were seven all together, including him. In their very
great misery they had become insensible to the bite of the lash or the
bruise of the club. The pain of the beating was dull and distant, just
as the things their eyes saw and their ears heard seemed dull and
distant. They were not half living, or quarter living. They were simply
so many bags of bones in which sparks of life fluttered faintly. When a
halt was made, they dropped down in the traces like dead dogs, and the
spark dimmed and paled and seemed to go out. And when the club or whip
fell upon them, the spark fluttered feebly up, and they tottered to
their feet and staggered on.

There came a day when Billee, the good-natured, fell and could not
rise. Hal had traded off his revolver, so he took the axe and knocked
Billee on the head as he lay in the traces, then cut the carcass out of
the harness and dragged it to one side. Buck saw, and his mates saw,
and they knew that this thing was very close to them. On the next day
Koona went, and but five of them remained: Joe, too far gone to be
malignant; Pike, crippled and limping, only half conscious and not
conscious enough longer to malinger; Sol-leks, the one-eyed, still
faithful to the toil of trace and trail, and mournful in that he had so
little strength with which to pull; Teek, who had not travelled so far
that winter and who was now beaten more than the others because he was
fresher; and Buck, still at the head of the team, but no longer
enforcing discipline or striving to enforce it, blind with weakness
half the time and keeping the trail by the loom of it and by the dim
feel of his feet.

It was beautiful spring weather, but neither dogs nor humans were aware
of it. Each day the sun rose earlier and set later. It was dawn by
three in the morning, and twilight lingered till nine at night. The
whole long day was a blaze of sunshine. The ghostly winter silence had
given way to the great spring murmur of awakening life. This murmur
arose from all the land, fraught with the joy of living. It came from
the things that lived and moved again, things which had been as dead
and which had not moved during the long months of frost. The sap was
rising in the pines. The willows and aspens were bursting out in young
buds. Shrubs and vines were putting on fresh garbs of green. Crickets
sang in the nights, and in the days all manner of creeping, crawling
things rustled forth into the sun. Partridges and woodpeckers were
booming and knocking in the forest. Squirrels were chattering, birds
singing, and overhead honked the wild-fowl driving up from the south in
cunning wedges that split the air.

From every hill slope came the trickle of running water, the music of
unseen fountains. All things were thawing, bending, snapping. The Yukon
was straining to break loose the ice that bound it down. It ate away
from beneath; the sun ate from above. Air-holes formed, fissures sprang
and spread apart, while thin sections of ice fell through bodily into
the river. And amid all this bursting, rending, throbbing of awakening
life, under the blazing sun and through the soft-sighing breezes, like
wayfarers to death, staggered the two men, the woman, and the huskies.

With the dogs falling, Mercedes weeping and riding, Hal swearing
innocuously, and Charles’s eyes wistfully watering, they staggered into
John Thornton’s camp at the mouth of White River. When they halted, the
dogs dropped down as though they had all been struck dead. Mercedes
dried her eyes and looked at John Thornton. Charles sat down on a log
to rest. He sat down very slowly and painstakingly what of his great
stiffness. Hal did the talking. John Thornton was whittling the last
touches on an axe-handle he had made from a stick of birch. He whittled
and listened, gave monosyllabic replies, and, when it was asked, terse
advice. He knew the breed, and he gave his advice in the certainty that
it would not be followed.

“They told us up above that the bottom was dropping out of the trail
and that the best thing for us to do was to lay over,” Hal said in
response to Thornton’s warning to take no more chances on the rotten
ice. “They told us we couldn’t make White River, and here we are.” This
last with a sneering ring of triumph in it.

“And they told you true,” John Thornton answered. “The bottom’s likely
to drop out at any moment. Only fools, with the blind luck of fools,
could have made it. I tell you straight, I wouldn’t risk my carcass on
that ice for all the gold in Alaska.”

“That’s because you’re not a fool, I suppose,” said Hal. “All the same,
we’ll go on to Dawson.” He uncoiled his whip. “Get up there, Buck! Hi!
Get up there! Mush on!”

Thornton went on whittling. It was idle, he knew, to get between a fool
and his folly; while two or three fools more or less would not alter
the scheme of things.

But the team did not get up at the command. It had long since passed
into the stage where blows were required to rouse it. The whip flashed
out, here and there, on its merciless errands. John Thornton compressed
his lips. Sol-leks was the first to crawl to his feet. Teek followed.
Joe came next, yelping with pain. Pike made painful efforts. Twice he
fell over, when half up, and on the third attempt managed to rise. Buck
made no effort. He lay quietly where he had fallen. The lash bit into
him again and again, but he neither whined nor struggled. Several times
Thornton started, as though to speak, but changed his mind. A moisture
came into his eyes, and, as the whipping continued, he arose and walked
irresolutely up and down.

This was the first time Buck had failed, in itself a sufficient reason
to drive Hal into a rage. He exchanged the whip for the customary club.
Buck refused to move under the rain of heavier blows which now fell
upon him. Like his mates, he was barely able to get up, but, unlike
them, he had made up his mind not to get up. He had a vague feeling of
impending doom. This had been strong upon him when he pulled in to the
bank, and it had not departed from him. What of the thin and rotten ice
he had felt under his feet all day, it seemed that he sensed disaster
close at hand, out there ahead on the ice where his master was trying
to drive him. He refused to stir. So greatly had he suffered, and so
far gone was he, that the blows did not hurt much. And as they
continued to fall upon him, the spark of life within flickered and went
down. It was nearly out. He felt strangely numb. As though from a great
distance, he was aware that he was being beaten. The last sensations of
pain left him. He no longer felt anything, though very faintly he could
hear the impact of the club upon his body. But it was no longer his
body, it seemed so far away.

And then, suddenly, without warning, uttering a cry that was
inarticulate and more like the cry of an animal, John Thornton sprang
upon the man who wielded the club. Hal was hurled backward, as though
struck by a falling tree. Mercedes screamed. Charles looked on
wistfully, wiped his watery eyes, but did not get up because of his
stiffness.

John Thornton stood over Buck, struggling to control himself, too
convulsed with rage to speak.

“If you strike that dog again, I’ll kill you,” he at last managed to
say in a choking voice.

“It’s my dog,” Hal replied, wiping the blood from his mouth as he came
back. “Get out of my way, or I’ll fix you. I’m going to Dawson.”

Thornton stood between him and Buck, and evinced no intention of
getting out of the way. Hal drew his long hunting-knife. Mercedes
screamed, cried, laughed, and manifested the chaotic abandonment of
hysteria. Thornton rapped Hal’s knuckles with the axe-handle, knocking
the knife to the ground. He rapped his knuckles again as he tried to
pick it up. Then he stooped, picked it up himself, and with two strokes
cut Buck’s traces.

Hal had no fight left in him. Besides, his hands were full with his
sister, or his arms, rather; while Buck was too near dead to be of
further use in hauling the sled. A few minutes later they pulled out
from the bank and down the river. Buck heard them go and raised his
head to see, Pike was leading, Sol-leks was at the wheel, and between
were Joe and Teek. They were limping and staggering. Mercedes was
riding the loaded sled. Hal guided at the gee-pole, and Charles
stumbled along in the rear.

As Buck watched them, Thornton knelt beside him and with rough, kindly
hands searched for broken bones. By the time his search had disclosed
nothing more than many bruises and a state of terrible starvation, the
sled was a quarter of a mile away. Dog and man watched it crawling
along over the ice. Suddenly, they saw its back end drop down, as into
a rut, and the gee-pole, with Hal clinging to it, jerk into the air.
Mercedes’s scream came to their ears. They saw Charles turn and make
one step to run back, and then a whole section of ice give way and dogs
and humans disappear. A yawning hole was all that was to be seen. The
bottom had dropped out of the trail.

John Thornton and Buck looked at each other.

“You poor devil,” said John Thornton, and Buck licked his hand.



Chapter VI. For the Love of a Man

When John Thornton froze his feet in the previous December his partners
had made him comfortable and left him to get well, going on themselves
up the river to get out a raft of saw-logs for Dawson. He was still
limping slightly at the time he rescued Buck, but with the continued
warm weather even the slight limp left him. And here, lying by the
river bank through the long spring days, watching the running water,
listening lazily to the songs of birds and the hum of nature, Buck
slowly won back his strength.

A rest comes very good after one has travelled three thousand miles,
and it must be confessed that Buck waxed lazy as his wounds healed, his
muscles swelled out, and the flesh came back to cover his bones. For
that matter, they were all loafing,—Buck, John Thornton, and Skeet and
Nig,—waiting for the raft to come that was to carry them down to
Dawson. Skeet was a little Irish setter who early made friends with
Buck, who, in a dying condition, was unable to resent her first
advances. She had the doctor trait which some dogs possess; and as a
mother cat washes her kittens, so she washed and cleansed Buck’s
wounds. Regularly, each morning after he had finished his breakfast,
she performed her self-appointed task, till he came to look for her
ministrations as much as he did for Thornton’s. Nig, equally friendly,
though less demonstrative, was a huge black dog, half bloodhound and
half deerhound, with eyes that laughed and a boundless good nature.

To Buck’s surprise these dogs manifested no jealousy toward him. They
seemed to share the kindliness and largeness of John Thornton. As Buck
grew stronger they enticed him into all sorts of ridiculous games, in
which Thornton himself could not forbear to join; and in this fashion
Buck romped through his convalescence and into a new existence. Love,
genuine passionate love, was his for the first time. This he had never
experienced at Judge Miller’s down in the sun-kissed Santa Clara
Valley. With the Judge’s sons, hunting and tramping, it had been a
working partnership; with the Judge’s grandsons, a sort of pompous
guardianship; and with the Judge himself, a stately and dignified
friendship. But love that was feverish and burning, that was adoration,
that was madness, it had taken John Thornton to arouse.

This man had saved his life, which was something; but, further, he was
the ideal master. Other men saw to the welfare of their dogs from a
sense of duty and business expediency; he saw to the welfare of his as
if they were his own children, because he could not help it. And he saw
further. He never forgot a kindly greeting or a cheering word, and to
sit down for a long talk with them (“gas” he called it) was as much his
delight as theirs. He had a way of taking Buck’s head roughly between
his hands, and resting his own head upon Buck’s, of shaking him back
and forth, the while calling him ill names that to Buck were love
names. Buck knew no greater joy than that rough embrace and the sound
of murmured oaths, and at each jerk back and forth it seemed that his
heart would be shaken out of his body so great was its ecstasy. And
when, released, he sprang to his feet, his mouth laughing, his eyes
eloquent, his throat vibrant with unuttered sound, and in that fashion
remained without movement, John Thornton would reverently exclaim,
“God! you can all but speak!”

Buck had a trick of love expression that was akin to hurt. He would
often seize Thornton’s hand in his mouth and close so fiercely that the
flesh bore the impress of his teeth for some time afterward. And as
Buck understood the oaths to be love words, so the man understood this
feigned bite for a caress.

For the most part, however, Buck’s love was expressed in adoration.
While he went wild with happiness when Thornton touched him or spoke to
him, he did not seek these tokens. Unlike Skeet, who was wont to shove
her nose under Thornton’s hand and nudge and nudge till petted, or Nig,
who would stalk up and rest his great head on Thornton’s knee, Buck was
content to adore at a distance. He would lie by the hour, eager, alert,
at Thornton’s feet, looking up into his face, dwelling upon it,
studying it, following with keenest interest each fleeting expression,
every movement or change of feature. Or, as chance might have it, he
would lie farther away, to the side or rear, watching the outlines of
the man and the occasional movements of his body. And often, such was
the communion in which they lived, the strength of Buck’s gaze would
draw John Thornton’s head around, and he would return the gaze, without
speech, his heart shining out of his eyes as Buck’s heart shone out.

For a long time after his rescue, Buck did not like Thornton to get out
of his sight. From the moment he left the tent to when he entered it
again, Buck would follow at his heels. His transient masters since he
had come into the Northland had bred in him a fear that no master could
be permanent. He was afraid that Thornton would pass out of his life as
Perrault and François and the Scotch half-breed had passed out. Even in
the night, in his dreams, he was haunted by this fear. At such times he
would shake off sleep and creep through the chill to the flap of the
tent, where he would stand and listen to the sound of his master’s
breathing.

But in spite of this great love he bore John Thornton, which seemed to
bespeak the soft civilizing influence, the strain of the primitive,
which the Northland had aroused in him, remained alive and active.
Faithfulness and devotion, things born of fire and roof, were his; yet
he retained his wildness and wiliness. He was a thing of the wild, come
in from the wild to sit by John Thornton’s fire, rather than a dog of
the soft Southland stamped with the marks of generations of
civilization. Because of his very great love, he could not steal from
this man, but from any other man, in any other camp, he did not
hesitate an instant; while the cunning with which he stole enabled him
to escape detection.

His face and body were scored by the teeth of many dogs, and he fought
as fiercely as ever and more shrewdly. Skeet and Nig were too
good-natured for quarrelling,—besides, they belonged to John Thornton;
but the strange dog, no matter what the breed or valor, swiftly
acknowledged Buck’s supremacy or found himself struggling for life with
a terrible antagonist. And Buck was merciless. He had learned well the
law of club and fang, and he never forewent an advantage or drew back
from a foe he had started on the way to Death. He had lessoned from
Spitz, and from the chief fighting dogs of the police and mail, and
knew there was no middle course. He must master or be mastered; while
to show mercy was a weakness. Mercy did not exist in the primordial
life. It was misunderstood for fear, and such misunderstandings made
for death. Kill or be killed, eat or be eaten, was the law; and this
mandate, down out of the depths of Time, he obeyed.

He was older than the days he had seen and the breaths he had drawn. He
linked the past with the present, and the eternity behind him throbbed
through him in a mighty rhythm to which he swayed as the tides and
seasons swayed. He sat by John Thornton’s fire, a broad-breasted dog,
white-fanged and long-furred; but behind him were the shades of all
manner of dogs, half-wolves and wild wolves, urgent and prompting,
tasting the savor of the meat he ate, thirsting for the water he drank,
scenting the wind with him, listening with him and telling him the
sounds made by the wild life in the forest, dictating his moods,
directing his actions, lying down to sleep with him when he lay down,
and dreaming with him and beyond him and becoming themselves the stuff
of his dreams.

So peremptorily did these shades beckon him, that each day mankind and
the claims of mankind slipped farther from him. Deep in the forest a
call was sounding, and as often as he heard this call, mysteriously
thrilling and luring, he felt compelled to turn his back upon the fire
and the beaten earth around it, and to plunge into the forest, and on
and on, he knew not where or why; nor did he wonder where or why, the
call sounding imperiously, deep in the forest. But as often as he
gained the soft unbroken earth and the green shade, the love for John
Thornton drew him back to the fire again.

Thornton alone held him. The rest of mankind was as nothing. Chance
travellers might praise or pet him; but he was cold under it all, and
from a too demonstrative man he would get up and walk away. When
Thornton’s partners, Hans and Pete, arrived on the long-expected raft,
Buck refused to notice them till he learned they were close to
Thornton; after that he tolerated them in a passive sort of way,
accepting favors from them as though he favored them by accepting. They
were of the same large type as Thornton, living close to the earth,
thinking simply and seeing clearly; and ere they swung the raft into
the big eddy by the saw-mill at Dawson, they understood Buck and his
ways, and did not insist upon an intimacy such as obtained with Skeet
and Nig.

For Thornton, however, his love seemed to grow and grow. He, alone
among men, could put a pack upon Buck’s back in the summer travelling.
Nothing was too great for Buck to do, when Thornton commanded. One day
(they had grub-staked themselves from the proceeds of the raft and left
Dawson for the head-waters of the Tanana) the men and dogs were sitting
on the crest of a cliff which fell away, straight down, to naked
bed-rock three hundred feet below. John Thornton was sitting near the
edge, Buck at his shoulder. A thoughtless whim seized Thornton, and he
drew the attention of Hans and Pete to the experiment he had in mind.
“Jump, Buck!” he commanded, sweeping his arm out and over the chasm.
The next instant he was grappling with Buck on the extreme edge, while
Hans and Pete were dragging them back into safety.

“It’s uncanny,” Pete said, after it was over and they had caught their
speech.

Thornton shook his head. “No, it is splendid, and it is terrible, too.
Do you know, it sometimes makes me afraid.”

“I’m not hankering to be the man that lays hands on you while he’s
around,” Pete announced conclusively, nodding his head toward Buck.

“Py Jingo!” was Hans’s contribution. “Not mineself either.”

It was at Circle City, ere the year was out, that Pete’s apprehensions
were realized. “Black” Burton, a man evil-tempered and malicious, had
been picking a quarrel with a tenderfoot at the bar, when Thornton
stepped good-naturedly between. Buck, as was his custom, was lying in a
corner, head on paws, watching his master’s every action. Burton struck
out, without warning, straight from the shoulder. Thornton was sent
spinning, and saved himself from falling only by clutching the rail of
the bar.

Those who were looking on heard what was neither bark nor yelp, but a
something which is best described as a roar, and they saw Buck’s body
rise up in the air as he left the floor for Burton’s throat. The man
saved his life by instinctively throwing out his arm, but was hurled
backward to the floor with Buck on top of him. Buck loosed his teeth
from the flesh of the arm and drove in again for the throat. This time
the man succeeded only in partly blocking, and his throat was torn
open. Then the crowd was upon Buck, and he was driven off; but while a
surgeon checked the bleeding, he prowled up and down, growling
furiously, attempting to rush in, and being forced back by an array of
hostile clubs. A “miners’ meeting,” called on the spot, decided that
the dog had sufficient provocation, and Buck was discharged. But his
reputation was made, and from that day his name spread through every
camp in Alaska.

Later on, in the fall of the year, he saved John Thornton’s life in
quite another fashion. The three partners were lining a long and narrow
poling-boat down a bad stretch of rapids on the Forty-Mile Creek. Hans
and Pete moved along the bank, snubbing with a thin Manila rope from
tree to tree, while Thornton remained in the boat, helping its descent
by means of a pole, and shouting directions to the shore. Buck, on the
bank, worried and anxious, kept abreast of the boat, his eyes never off
his master.

At a particularly bad spot, where a ledge of barely submerged rocks
jutted out into the river, Hans cast off the rope, and, while Thornton
poled the boat out into the stream, ran down the bank with the end in
his hand to snub the boat when it had cleared the ledge. This it did,
and was flying down-stream in a current as swift as a mill-race, when
Hans checked it with the rope and checked too suddenly. The boat
flirted over and snubbed in to the bank bottom up, while Thornton,
flung sheer out of it, was carried down-stream toward the worst part of
the rapids, a stretch of wild water in which no swimmer could live.

Buck had sprung in on the instant; and at the end of three hundred
yards, amid a mad swirl of water, he overhauled Thornton. When he felt
him grasp his tail, Buck headed for the bank, swimming with all his
splendid strength. But the progress shoreward was slow; the progress
down-stream amazingly rapid. From below came the fatal roaring where
the wild current went wilder and was rent in shreds and spray by the
rocks which thrust through like the teeth of an enormous comb. The suck
of the water as it took the beginning of the last steep pitch was
frightful, and Thornton knew that the shore was impossible. He scraped
furiously over a rock, bruised across a second, and struck a third with
crushing force. He clutched its slippery top with both hands, releasing
Buck, and above the roar of the churning water shouted: “Go, Buck! Go!”

Buck could not hold his own, and swept on down-stream, struggling
desperately, but unable to win back. When he heard Thornton’s command
repeated, he partly reared out of the water, throwing his head high, as
though for a last look, then turned obediently toward the bank. He swam
powerfully and was dragged ashore by Pete and Hans at the very point
where swimming ceased to be possible and destruction began.

They knew that the time a man could cling to a slippery rock in the
face of that driving current was a matter of minutes, and they ran as
fast as they could up the bank to a point far above where Thornton was
hanging on. They attached the line with which they had been snubbing
the boat to Buck’s neck and shoulders, being careful that it should
neither strangle him nor impede his swimming, and launched him into the
stream. He struck out boldly, but not straight enough into the stream.
He discovered the mistake too late, when Thornton was abreast of him
and a bare half-dozen strokes away while he was being carried
helplessly past.

Hans promptly snubbed with the rope, as though Buck were a boat. The
rope thus tightening on him in the sweep of the current, he was jerked
under the surface, and under the surface he remained till his body
struck against the bank and he was hauled out. He was half drowned, and
Hans and Pete threw themselves upon him, pounding the breath into him
and the water out of him. He staggered to his feet and fell down. The
faint sound of Thornton’s voice came to them, and though they could not
make out the words of it, they knew that he was in his extremity. His
master’s voice acted on Buck like an electric shock, He sprang to his
feet and ran up the bank ahead of the men to the point of his previous
departure.

Again the rope was attached and he was launched, and again he struck
out, but this time straight into the stream. He had miscalculated once,
but he would not be guilty of it a second time. Hans paid out the rope,
permitting no slack, while Pete kept it clear of coils. Buck held on
till he was on a line straight above Thornton; then he turned, and with
the speed of an express train headed down upon him. Thornton saw him
coming, and, as Buck struck him like a battering ram, with the whole
force of the current behind him, he reached up and closed with both
arms around the shaggy neck. Hans snubbed the rope around the tree, and
Buck and Thornton were jerked under the water. Strangling, suffocating,
sometimes one uppermost and sometimes the other, dragging over the
jagged bottom, smashing against rocks and snags, they veered in to the
bank.

Thornton came to, belly downward and being violently propelled back and
forth across a drift log by Hans and Pete. His first glance was for
Buck, over whose limp and apparently lifeless body Nig was setting up a
howl, while Skeet was licking the wet face and closed eyes. Thornton
was himself bruised and battered, and he went carefully over Buck’s
body, when he had been brought around, finding three broken ribs.

“That settles it,” he announced. “We camp right here.” And camp they
did, till Buck’s ribs knitted and he was able to travel.

That winter, at Dawson, Buck performed another exploit, not so heroic,
perhaps, but one that put his name many notches higher on the
totem-pole of Alaskan fame. This exploit was particularly gratifying to
the three men; for they stood in need of the outfit which it furnished,
and were enabled to make a long-desired trip into the virgin East,
where miners had not yet appeared. It was brought about by a
conversation in the Eldorado Saloon, in which men waxed boastful of
their favorite dogs. Buck, because of his record, was the target for
these men, and Thornton was driven stoutly to defend him. At the end of
half an hour one man stated that his dog could start a sled with five
hundred pounds and walk off with it; a second bragged six hundred for
his dog; and a third, seven hundred.

“Pooh! pooh!” said John Thornton; “Buck can start a thousand pounds.”

“And break it out? and walk off with it for a hundred yards?” demanded
Matthewson, a Bonanza King, he of the seven hundred vaunt.

“And break it out, and walk off with it for a hundred yards,” John
Thornton said coolly.

“Well,” Matthewson said, slowly and deliberately, so that all could
hear, “I’ve got a thousand dollars that says he can’t. And there it
is.” So saying, he slammed a sack of gold dust of the size of a bologna
sausage down upon the bar.

Nobody spoke. Thornton’s bluff, if bluff it was, had been called. He
could feel a flush of warm blood creeping up his face. His tongue had
tricked him. He did not know whether Buck could start a thousand
pounds. Half a ton! The enormousness of it appalled him. He had great
faith in Buck’s strength and had often thought him capable of starting
such a load; but never, as now, had he faced the possibility of it, the
eyes of a dozen men fixed upon him, silent and waiting. Further, he had
no thousand dollars; nor had Hans or Pete.

“I’ve got a sled standing outside now, with twenty fiftypound sacks of
flour on it,” Matthewson went on with brutal directness; “so don’t let
that hinder you.”

Thornton did not reply. He did not know what to say. He glanced from
face to face in the absent way of a man who has lost the power of
thought and is seeking somewhere to find the thing that will start it
going again. The face of Jim O’Brien, a Mastodon King and old-time
comrade, caught his eyes. It was as a cue to him, seeming to rouse him
to do what he would never have dreamed of doing.

“Can you lend me a thousand?” he asked, almost in a whisper.

“Sure,” answered O’Brien, thumping down a plethoric sack by the side of
Matthewson’s. “Though it’s little faith I’m having, John, that the
beast can do the trick.”

The Eldorado emptied its occupants into the street to see the test. The
tables were deserted, and the dealers and gamekeepers came forth to see
the outcome of the wager and to lay odds. Several hundred men, furred
and mittened, banked around the sled within easy distance. Matthewson’s
sled, loaded with a thousand pounds of flour, had been standing for a
couple of hours, and in the intense cold (it was sixty below zero) the
runners had frozen fast to the hard-packed snow. Men offered odds of
two to one that Buck could not budge the sled. A quibble arose
concerning the phrase “break out.” O’Brien contended it was Thornton’s
privilege to knock the runners loose, leaving Buck to “break it out”
from a dead standstill. Matthewson insisted that the phrase included
breaking the runners from the frozen grip of the snow. A majority of
the men who had witnessed the making of the bet decided in his favor,
whereat the odds went up to three to one against Buck.

There were no takers. Not a man believed him capable of the feat.
Thornton had been hurried into the wager, heavy with doubt; and now
that he looked at the sled itself, the concrete fact, with the regular
team of ten dogs curled up in the snow before it, the more impossible
the task appeared. Matthewson waxed jubilant.

“Three to one!” he proclaimed. “I’ll lay you another thousand at that
figure, Thornton. What d’ye say?”

Thornton’s doubt was strong in his face, but his fighting spirit was
aroused—the fighting spirit that soars above odds, fails to recognize
the impossible, and is deaf to all save the clamor for battle. He
called Hans and Pete to him. Their sacks were slim, and with his own
the three partners could rake together only two hundred dollars. In the
ebb of their fortunes, this sum was their total capital; yet they laid
it unhesitatingly against Matthewson’s six hundred.

The team of ten dogs was unhitched, and Buck, with his own harness, was
put into the sled. He had caught the contagion of the excitement, and
he felt that in some way he must do a great thing for John Thornton.
Murmurs of admiration at his splendid appearance went up. He was in
perfect condition, without an ounce of superfluous flesh, and the one
hundred and fifty pounds that he weighed were so many pounds of grit
and virility. His furry coat shone with the sheen of silk. Down the
neck and across the shoulders, his mane, in repose as it was, half
bristled and seemed to lift with every movement, as though excess of
vigor made each particular hair alive and active. The great breast and
heavy fore legs were no more than in proportion with the rest of the
body, where the muscles showed in tight rolls underneath the skin. Men
felt these muscles and proclaimed them hard as iron, and the odds went
down to two to one.

“Gad, sir! Gad, sir!” stuttered a member of the latest dynasty, a king
of the Skookum Benches. “I offer you eight hundred for him, sir, before
the test, sir; eight hundred just as he stands.”

Thornton shook his head and stepped to Buck’s side.

“You must stand off from him,” Matthewson protested. “Free play and
plenty of room.”

The crowd fell silent; only could be heard the voices of the gamblers
vainly offering two to one. Everybody acknowledged Buck a magnificent
animal, but twenty fifty-pound sacks of flour bulked too large in their
eyes for them to loosen their pouch-strings.

Thornton knelt down by Buck’s side. He took his head in his two hands
and rested cheek on cheek. He did not playfully shake him, as was his
wont, or murmur soft love curses; but he whispered in his ear. “As you
love me, Buck. As you love me,” was what he whispered. Buck whined with
suppressed eagerness.

The crowd was watching curiously. The affair was growing mysterious. It
seemed like a conjuration. As Thornton got to his feet, Buck seized his
mittened hand between his jaws, pressing in with his teeth and
releasing slowly, half-reluctantly. It was the answer, in terms, not of
speech, but of love. Thornton stepped well back.

“Now, Buck,” he said.

Buck tightened the traces, then slacked them for a matter of several
inches. It was the way he had learned.

“Gee!” Thornton’s voice rang out, sharp in the tense silence.

Buck swung to the right, ending the movement in a plunge that took up
the slack and with a sudden jerk arrested his one hundred and fifty
pounds. The load quivered, and from under the runners arose a crisp
crackling.

“Haw!” Thornton commanded.

Buck duplicated the manœuvre, this time to the left. The crackling
turned into a snapping, the sled pivoting and the runners slipping and
grating several inches to the side. The sled was broken out. Men were
holding their breaths, intensely unconscious of the fact.

“Now, MUSH!”

Thornton’s command cracked out like a pistol-shot. Buck threw himself
forward, tightening the traces with a jarring lunge. His whole body was
gathered compactly together in the tremendous effort, the muscles
writhing and knotting like live things under the silky fur. His great
chest was low to the ground, his head forward and down, while his feet
were flying like mad, the claws scarring the hard-packed snow in
parallel grooves. The sled swayed and trembled, half-started forward.
One of his feet slipped, and one man groaned aloud. Then the sled
lurched ahead in what appeared a rapid succession of jerks, though it
never really came to a dead stop again...half an inch...an inch... two
inches... The jerks perceptibly diminished; as the sled gained
momentum, he caught them up, till it was moving steadily along.

Men gasped and began to breathe again, unaware that for a moment they
had ceased to breathe. Thornton was running behind, encouraging Buck
with short, cheery words. The distance had been measured off, and as he
neared the pile of firewood which marked the end of the hundred yards,
a cheer began to grow and grow, which burst into a roar as he passed
the firewood and halted at command. Every man was tearing himself
loose, even Matthewson. Hats and mittens were flying in the air. Men
were shaking hands, it did not matter with whom, and bubbling over in a
general incoherent babel.

But Thornton fell on his knees beside Buck. Head was against head, and
he was shaking him back and forth. Those who hurried up heard him
cursing Buck, and he cursed him long and fervently, and softly and
lovingly.

“Gad, sir! Gad, sir!” spluttered the Skookum Bench king. “I’ll give you
a thousand for him, sir, a thousand, sir—twelve hundred, sir.”

Thornton rose to his feet. His eyes were wet. The tears were streaming
frankly down his cheeks. “Sir,” he said to the Skookum Bench king, “no,
sir. You can go to hell, sir. It’s the best I can do for you, sir.”

Buck seized Thornton’s hand in his teeth. Thornton shook him back and
forth. As though animated by a common impulse, the onlookers drew back
to a respectful distance; nor were they again indiscreet enough to
interrupt.



Chapter VII. The Sounding of the Call

When Buck earned sixteen hundred dollars in five minutes for John
Thornton, he made it possible for his master to pay off certain debts
and to journey with his partners into the East after a fabled lost
mine, the history of which was as old as the history of the country.
Many men had sought it; few had found it; and more than a few there
were who had never returned from the quest. This lost mine was steeped
in tragedy and shrouded in mystery. No one knew of the first man. The
oldest tradition stopped before it got back to him. From the beginning
there had been an ancient and ramshackle cabin. Dying men had sworn to
it, and to the mine the site of which it marked, clinching their
testimony with nuggets that were unlike any known grade of gold in the
Northland.

But no living man had looted this treasure house, and the dead were
dead; wherefore John Thornton and Pete and Hans, with Buck and half a
dozen other dogs, faced into the East on an unknown trail to achieve
where men and dogs as good as themselves had failed. They sledded
seventy miles up the Yukon, swung to the left into the Stewart River,
passed the Mayo and the McQuestion, and held on until the Stewart
itself became a streamlet, threading the upstanding peaks which marked
the backbone of the continent.

John Thornton asked little of man or nature. He was unafraid of the
wild. With a handful of salt and a rifle he could plunge into the
wilderness and fare wherever he pleased and as long as he pleased.
Being in no haste, Indian fashion, he hunted his dinner in the course
of the day’s travel; and if he failed to find it, like the Indian, he
kept on travelling, secure in the knowledge that sooner or later he
would come to it. So, on this great journey into the East, straight
meat was the bill of fare, ammunition and tools principally made up the
load on the sled, and the time-card was drawn upon the limitless
future.

To Buck it was boundless delight, this hunting, fishing, and indefinite
wandering through strange places. For weeks at a time they would hold
on steadily, day after day; and for weeks upon end they would camp,
here and there, the dogs loafing and the men burning holes through
frozen muck and gravel and washing countless pans of dirt by the heat
of the fire. Sometimes they went hungry, sometimes they feasted
riotously, all according to the abundance of game and the fortune of
hunting. Summer arrived, and dogs and men packed on their backs, rafted
across blue mountain lakes, and descended or ascended unknown rivers in
slender boats whipsawed from the standing forest.

The months came and went, and back and forth they twisted through the
uncharted vastness, where no men were and yet where men had been if the
Lost Cabin were true. They went across divides in summer blizzards,
shivered under the midnight sun on naked mountains between the timber
line and the eternal snows, dropped into summer valleys amid swarming
gnats and flies, and in the shadows of glaciers picked strawberries and
flowers as ripe and fair as any the Southland could boast. In the fall
of the year they penetrated a weird lake country, sad and silent, where
wildfowl had been, but where then there was no life nor sign of
life—only the blowing of chill winds, the forming of ice in sheltered
places, and the melancholy rippling of waves on lonely beaches.

And through another winter they wandered on the obliterated trails of
men who had gone before. Once, they came upon a path blazed through the
forest, an ancient path, and the Lost Cabin seemed very near. But the
path began nowhere and ended nowhere, and it remained mystery, as the
man who made it and the reason he made it remained mystery. Another
time they chanced upon the time-graven wreckage of a hunting lodge, and
amid the shreds of rotted blankets John Thornton found a long-barrelled
flint-lock. He knew it for a Hudson Bay Company gun of the young days
in the Northwest, when such a gun was worth its height in beaver skins
packed flat, And that was all—no hint as to the man who in an early day
had reared the lodge and left the gun among the blankets.

Spring came on once more, and at the end of all their wandering they
found, not the Lost Cabin, but a shallow placer in a broad valley where
the gold showed like yellow butter across the bottom of the
washing-pan. They sought no farther. Each day they worked earned them
thousands of dollars in clean dust and nuggets, and they worked every
day. The gold was sacked in moose-hide bags, fifty pounds to the bag,
and piled like so much firewood outside the spruce-bough lodge. Like
giants they toiled, days flashing on the heels of days like dreams as
they heaped the treasure up.

There was nothing for the dogs to do, save the hauling in of meat now
and again that Thornton killed, and Buck spent long hours musing by the
fire. The vision of the short-legged hairy man came to him more
frequently, now that there was little work to be done; and often,
blinking by the fire, Buck wandered with him in that other world which
he remembered.

The salient thing of this other world seemed fear. When he watched the
hairy man sleeping by the fire, head between his knees and hands
clasped above, Buck saw that he slept restlessly, with many starts and
awakenings, at which times he would peer fearfully into the darkness
and fling more wood upon the fire. Did they walk by the beach of a sea,
where the hairy man gathered shellfish and ate them as he gathered, it
was with eyes that roved everywhere for hidden danger and with legs
prepared to run like the wind at its first appearance. Through the
forest they crept noiselessly, Buck at the hairy man’s heels; and they
were alert and vigilant, the pair of them, ears twitching and moving
and nostrils quivering, for the man heard and smelled as keenly as
Buck. The hairy man could spring up into the trees and travel ahead as
fast as on the ground, swinging by the arms from limb to limb,
sometimes a dozen feet apart, letting go and catching, never falling,
never missing his grip. In fact, he seemed as much at home among the
trees as on the ground; and Buck had memories of nights of vigil spent
beneath trees wherein the hairy man roosted, holding on tightly as he
slept.

And closely akin to the visions of the hairy man was the call still
sounding in the depths of the forest. It filled him with a great unrest
and strange desires. It caused him to feel a vague, sweet gladness, and
he was aware of wild yearnings and stirrings for he knew not what.
Sometimes he pursued the call into the forest, looking for it as though
it were a tangible thing, barking softly or defiantly, as the mood
might dictate. He would thrust his nose into the cool wood moss, or
into the black soil where long grasses grew, and snort with joy at the
fat earth smells; or he would crouch for hours, as if in concealment,
behind fungus-covered trunks of fallen trees, wide-eyed and wide-eared
to all that moved and sounded about him. It might be, lying thus, that
he hoped to surprise this call he could not understand. But he did not
know why he did these various things. He was impelled to do them, and
did not reason about them at all.

Irresistible impulses seized him. He would be lying in camp, dozing
lazily in the heat of the day, when suddenly his head would lift and
his ears cock up, intent and listening, and he would spring to his feet
and dash away, and on and on, for hours, through the forest aisles and
across the open spaces where the niggerheads bunched. He loved to run
down dry watercourses, and to creep and spy upon the bird life in the
woods. For a day at a time he would lie in the underbrush where he
could watch the partridges drumming and strutting up and down. But
especially he loved to run in the dim twilight of the summer midnights,
listening to the subdued and sleepy murmurs of the forest, reading
signs and sounds as man may read a book, and seeking for the mysterious
something that called—called, waking or sleeping, at all times, for him
to come.

One night he sprang from sleep with a start, eager-eyed, nostrils
quivering and scenting, his mane bristling in recurrent waves. From the
forest came the call (or one note of it, for the call was many noted),
distinct and definite as never before,—a long-drawn howl, like, yet
unlike, any noise made by husky dog. And he knew it, in the old
familiar way, as a sound heard before. He sprang through the sleeping
camp and in swift silence dashed through the woods. As he drew closer
to the cry he went more slowly, with caution in every movement, till he
came to an open place among the trees, and looking out saw, erect on
haunches, with nose pointed to the sky, a long, lean, timber wolf.

He had made no noise, yet it ceased from its howling and tried to sense
his presence. Buck stalked into the open, half crouching, body gathered
compactly together, tail straight and stiff, feet falling with unwonted
care. Every movement advertised commingled threatening and overture of
friendliness. It was the menacing truce that marks the meeting of wild
beasts that prey. But the wolf fled at sight of him. He followed, with
wild leapings, in a frenzy to overtake. He ran him into a blind
channel, in the bed of the creek where a timber jam barred the way. The
wolf whirled about, pivoting on his hind legs after the fashion of Joe
and of all cornered husky dogs, snarling and bristling, clipping his
teeth together in a continuous and rapid succession of snaps.

Buck did not attack, but circled him about and hedged him in with
friendly advances. The wolf was suspicious and afraid; for Buck made
three of him in weight, while his head barely reached Buck’s shoulder.
Watching his chance, he darted away, and the chase was resumed. Time
and again he was cornered, and the thing repeated, though he was in
poor condition, or Buck could not so easily have overtaken him. He
would run till Buck’s head was even with his flank, when he would whirl
around at bay, only to dash away again at the first opportunity.

But in the end Buck’s pertinacity was rewarded; for the wolf, finding
that no harm was intended, finally sniffed noses with him. Then they
became friendly, and played about in the nervous, half-coy way with
which fierce beasts belie their fierceness. After some time of this the
wolf started off at an easy lope in a manner that plainly showed he was
going somewhere. He made it clear to Buck that he was to come, and they
ran side by side through the sombre twilight, straight up the creek
bed, into the gorge from which it issued, and across the bleak divide
where it took its rise.

On the opposite slope of the watershed they came down into a level
country where were great stretches of forest and many streams, and
through these great stretches they ran steadily, hour after hour, the
sun rising higher and the day growing warmer. Buck was wildly glad. He
knew he was at last answering the call, running by the side of his wood
brother toward the place from where the call surely came. Old memories
were coming upon him fast, and he was stirring to them as of old he
stirred to the realities of which they were the shadows. He had done
this thing before, somewhere in that other and dimly remembered world,
and he was doing it again, now, running free in the open, the unpacked
earth underfoot, the wide sky overhead.

They stopped by a running stream to drink, and, stopping, Buck
remembered John Thornton. He sat down. The wolf started on toward the
place from where the call surely came, then returned to him, sniffing
noses and making actions as though to encourage him. But Buck turned
about and started slowly on the back track. For the better part of an
hour the wild brother ran by his side, whining softly. Then he sat
down, pointed his nose upward, and howled. It was a mournful howl, and
as Buck held steadily on his way he heard it grow faint and fainter
until it was lost in the distance.

John Thornton was eating dinner when Buck dashed into camp and sprang
upon him in a frenzy of affection, overturning him, scrambling upon
him, licking his face, biting his hand—“playing the general tom-fool,”
as John Thornton characterized it, the while he shook Buck back and
forth and cursed him lovingly.

For two days and nights Buck never left camp, never let Thornton out of
his sight. He followed him about at his work, watched him while he ate,
saw him into his blankets at night and out of them in the morning. But
after two days the call in the forest began to sound more imperiously
than ever. Buck’s restlessness came back on him, and he was haunted by
recollections of the wild brother, and of the smiling land beyond the
divide and the run side by side through the wide forest stretches. Once
again he took to wandering in the woods, but the wild brother came no
more; and though he listened through long vigils, the mournful howl was
never raised.

He began to sleep out at night, staying away from camp for days at a
time; and once he crossed the divide at the head of the creek and went
down into the land of timber and streams. There he wandered for a week,
seeking vainly for fresh sign of the wild brother, killing his meat as
he travelled and travelling with the long, easy lope that seems never
to tire. He fished for salmon in a broad stream that emptied somewhere
into the sea, and by this stream he killed a large black bear, blinded
by the mosquitoes while likewise fishing, and raging through the forest
helpless and terrible. Even so, it was a hard fight, and it aroused the
last latent remnants of Buck’s ferocity. And two days later, when he
returned to his kill and found a dozen wolverenes quarrelling over the
spoil, he scattered them like chaff; and those that fled left two
behind who would quarrel no more.

The blood-longing became stronger than ever before. He was a killer, a
thing that preyed, living on the things that lived, unaided, alone, by
virtue of his own strength and prowess, surviving triumphantly in a
hostile environment where only the strong survived. Because of all this
he became possessed of a great pride in himself, which communicated
itself like a contagion to his physical being. It advertised itself in
all his movements, was apparent in the play of every muscle, spoke
plainly as speech in the way he carried himself, and made his glorious
furry coat if anything more glorious. But for the stray brown on his
muzzle and above his eyes, and for the splash of white hair that ran
midmost down his chest, he might well have been mistaken for a gigantic
wolf, larger than the largest of the breed. From his St. Bernard father
he had inherited size and weight, but it was his shepherd mother who
had given shape to that size and weight. His muzzle was the long wolf
muzzle, save that it was larger than the muzzle of any wolf; and his
head, somewhat broader, was the wolf head on a massive scale.

His cunning was wolf cunning, and wild cunning; his intelligence,
shepherd intelligence and St. Bernard intelligence; and all this, plus
an experience gained in the fiercest of schools, made him as formidable
a creature as any that roamed the wild. A carnivorous animal living on
a straight meat diet, he was in full flower, at the high tide of his
life, overspilling with vigor and virility. When Thornton passed a
caressing hand along his back, a snapping and crackling followed the
hand, each hair discharging its pent magnetism at the contact. Every
part, brain and body, nerve tissue and fibre, was keyed to the most
exquisite pitch; and between all the parts there was a perfect
equilibrium or adjustment. To sights and sounds and events which
required action, he responded with lightning-like rapidity. Quickly as
a husky dog could leap to defend from attack or to attack, he could
leap twice as quickly. He saw the movement, or heard sound, and
responded in less time than another dog required to compass the mere
seeing or hearing. He perceived and determined and responded in the
same instant. In point of fact the three actions of perceiving,
determining, and responding were sequential; but so infinitesimal were
the intervals of time between them that they appeared simultaneous. His
muscles were surcharged with vitality, and snapped into play sharply,
like steel springs. Life streamed through him in splendid flood, glad
and rampant, until it seemed that it would burst him asunder in sheer
ecstasy and pour forth generously over the world.

“Never was there such a dog,” said John Thornton one day, as the
partners watched Buck marching out of camp.

“When he was made, the mould was broke,” said Pete.

“Py jingo! I t’ink so mineself,” Hans affirmed.

They saw him marching out of camp, but they did not see the instant and
terrible transformation which took place as soon as he was within the
secrecy of the forest. He no longer marched. At once he became a thing
of the wild, stealing along softly, cat-footed, a passing shadow that
appeared and disappeared among the shadows. He knew how to take
advantage of every cover, to crawl on his belly like a snake, and like
a snake to leap and strike. He could take a ptarmigan from its nest,
kill a rabbit as it slept, and snap in mid air the little chipmunks
fleeing a second too late for the trees. Fish, in open pools, were not
too quick for him; nor were beaver, mending their dams, too wary. He
killed to eat, not from wantonness; but he preferred to eat what he
killed himself. So a lurking humor ran through his deeds, and it was
his delight to steal upon the squirrels, and, when he all but had them,
to let them go, chattering in mortal fear to the treetops.

As the fall of the year came on, the moose appeared in greater
abundance, moving slowly down to meet the winter in the lower and less
rigorous valleys. Buck had already dragged down a stray part-grown
calf; but he wished strongly for larger and more formidable quarry, and
he came upon it one day on the divide at the head of the creek. A band
of twenty moose had crossed over from the land of streams and timber,
and chief among them was a great bull. He was in a savage temper, and,
standing over six feet from the ground, was as formidable an antagonist
as even Buck could desire. Back and forth the bull tossed his great
palmated antlers, branching to fourteen points and embracing seven feet
within the tips. His small eyes burned with a vicious and bitter light,
while he roared with fury at sight of Buck.

From the bull’s side, just forward of the flank, protruded a feathered
arrow-end, which accounted for his savageness. Guided by that instinct
which came from the old hunting days of the primordial world, Buck
proceeded to cut the bull out from the herd. It was no slight task. He
would bark and dance about in front of the bull, just out of reach of
the great antlers and of the terrible splay hoofs which could have
stamped his life out with a single blow. Unable to turn his back on the
fanged danger and go on, the bull would be driven into paroxysms of
rage. At such moments he charged Buck, who retreated craftily, luring
him on by a simulated inability to escape. But when he was thus
separated from his fellows, two or three of the younger bulls would
charge back upon Buck and enable the wounded bull to rejoin the herd.

There is a patience of the wild—dogged, tireless, persistent as life
itself—that holds motionless for endless hours the spider in its web,
the snake in its coils, the panther in its ambuscade; this patience
belongs peculiarly to life when it hunts its living food; and it
belonged to Buck as he clung to the flank of the herd, retarding its
march, irritating the young bulls, worrying the cows with their
half-grown calves, and driving the wounded bull mad with helpless rage.
For half a day this continued. Buck multiplied himself, attacking from
all sides, enveloping the herd in a whirlwind of menace, cutting out
his victim as fast as it could rejoin its mates, wearing out the
patience of creatures preyed upon, which is a lesser patience than that
of creatures preying.

As the day wore along and the sun dropped to its bed in the northwest
(the darkness had come back and the fall nights were six hours long),
the young bulls retraced their steps more and more reluctantly to the
aid of their beset leader. The down-coming winter was harrying them on
to the lower levels, and it seemed they could never shake off this
tireless creature that held them back. Besides, it was not the life of
the herd, or of the young bulls, that was threatened. The life of only
one member was demanded, which was a remoter interest than their lives,
and in the end they were content to pay the toll.

As twilight fell the old bull stood with lowered head, watching his
mates—the cows he had known, the calves he had fathered, the bulls he
had mastered—as they shambled on at a rapid pace through the fading
light. He could not follow, for before his nose leaped the merciless
fanged terror that would not let him go. Three hundredweight more than
half a ton he weighed; he had lived a long, strong life, full of fight
and struggle, and at the end he faced death at the teeth of a creature
whose head did not reach beyond his great knuckled knees.

From then on, night and day, Buck never left his prey, never gave it a
moment’s rest, never permitted it to browse the leaves of trees or the
shoots of young birch and willow. Nor did he give the wounded bull
opportunity to slake his burning thirst in the slender trickling
streams they crossed. Often, in desperation, he burst into long
stretches of flight. At such times Buck did not attempt to stay him,
but loped easily at his heels, satisfied with the way the game was
played, lying down when the moose stood still, attacking him fiercely
when he strove to eat or drink.

The great head drooped more and more under its tree of horns, and the
shambling trot grew weak and weaker. He took to standing for long
periods, with nose to the ground and dejected ears dropped limply; and
Buck found more time in which to get water for himself and in which to
rest. At such moments, panting with red lolling tongue and with eyes
fixed upon the big bull, it appeared to Buck that a change was coming
over the face of things. He could feel a new stir in the land. As the
moose were coming into the land, other kinds of life were coming in.
Forest and stream and air seemed palpitant with their presence. The
news of it was borne in upon him, not by sight, or sound, or smell, but
by some other and subtler sense. He heard nothing, saw nothing, yet
knew that the land was somehow different; that through it strange
things were afoot and ranging; and he resolved to investigate after he
had finished the business in hand.

At last, at the end of the fourth day, he pulled the great moose down.
For a day and a night he remained by the kill, eating and sleeping,
turn and turn about. Then, rested, refreshed and strong, he turned his
face toward camp and John Thornton. He broke into the long easy lope,
and went on, hour after hour, never at loss for the tangled way,
heading straight home through strange country with a certitude of
direction that put man and his magnetic needle to shame.

As he held on he became more and more conscious of the new stir in the
land. There was life abroad in it different from the life which had
been there throughout the summer. No longer was this fact borne in upon
him in some subtle, mysterious way. The birds talked of it, the
squirrels chattered about it, the very breeze whispered of it. Several
times he stopped and drew in the fresh morning air in great sniffs,
reading a message which made him leap on with greater speed. He was
oppressed with a sense of calamity happening, if it were not calamity
already happened; and as he crossed the last watershed and dropped down
into the valley toward camp, he proceeded with greater caution.

Three miles away he came upon a fresh trail that sent his neck hair
rippling and bristling, It led straight toward camp and John Thornton.
Buck hurried on, swiftly and stealthily, every nerve straining and
tense, alert to the multitudinous details which told a story—all but
the end. His nose gave him a varying description of the passage of the
life on the heels of which he was travelling. He remarked the pregnant
silence of the forest. The bird life had flitted. The squirrels were in
hiding. One only he saw,—a sleek gray fellow, flattened against a gray
dead limb so that he seemed a part of it, a woody excrescence upon the
wood itself.

As Buck slid along with the obscureness of a gliding shadow, his nose
was jerked suddenly to the side as though a positive force had gripped
and pulled it. He followed the new scent into a thicket and found Nig.
He was lying on his side, dead where he had dragged himself, an arrow
protruding, head and feathers, from either side of his body.

A hundred yards farther on, Buck came upon one of the sled-dogs
Thornton had bought in Dawson. This dog was thrashing about in a
death-struggle, directly on the trail, and Buck passed around him
without stopping. From the camp came the faint sound of many voices,
rising and falling in a sing-song chant. Bellying forward to the edge
of the clearing, he found Hans, lying on his face, feathered with
arrows like a porcupine. At the same instant Buck peered out where the
spruce-bough lodge had been and saw what made his hair leap straight up
on his neck and shoulders. A gust of overpowering rage swept over him.
He did not know that he growled, but he growled aloud with a terrible
ferocity. For the last time in his life he allowed passion to usurp
cunning and reason, and it was because of his great love for John
Thornton that he lost his head.

The Yeehats were dancing about the wreckage of the spruce-bough lodge
when they heard a fearful roaring and saw rushing upon them an animal
the like of which they had never seen before. It was Buck, a live
hurricane of fury, hurling himself upon them in a frenzy to destroy. He
sprang at the foremost man (it was the chief of the Yeehats), ripping
the throat wide open till the rent jugular spouted a fountain of blood.
He did not pause to worry the victim, but ripped in passing, with the
next bound tearing wide the throat of a second man. There was no
withstanding him. He plunged about in their very midst, tearing,
rending, destroying, in constant and terrific motion which defied the
arrows they discharged at him. In fact, so inconceivably rapid were his
movements, and so closely were the Indians tangled together, that they
shot one another with the arrows; and one young hunter, hurling a spear
at Buck in mid air, drove it through the chest of another hunter with
such force that the point broke through the skin of the back and stood
out beyond. Then a panic seized the Yeehats, and they fled in terror to
the woods, proclaiming as they fled the advent of the Evil Spirit.

And truly Buck was the Fiend incarnate, raging at their heels and
dragging them down like deer as they raced through the trees. It was a
fateful day for the Yeehats. They scattered far and wide over the
country, and it was not till a week later that the last of the
survivors gathered together in a lower valley and counted their losses.
As for Buck, wearying of the pursuit, he returned to the desolated
camp. He found Pete where he had been killed in his blankets in the
first moment of surprise. Thornton’s desperate struggle was
fresh-written on the earth, and Buck scented every detail of it down to
the edge of a deep pool. By the edge, head and fore feet in the water,
lay Skeet, faithful to the last. The pool itself, muddy and discolored
from the sluice boxes, effectually hid what it contained, and it
contained John Thornton; for Buck followed his trace into the water,
from which no trace led away.

All day Buck brooded by the pool or roamed restlessly about the camp.
Death, as a cessation of movement, as a passing out and away from the
lives of the living, he knew, and he knew John Thornton was dead. It
left a great void in him, somewhat akin to hunger, but a void which
ached and ached, and which food could not fill, At times, when he
paused to contemplate the carcasses of the Yeehats, he forgot the pain
of it; and at such times he was aware of a great pride in himself,—a
pride greater than any he had yet experienced. He had killed man, the
noblest game of all, and he had killed in the face of the law of club
and fang. He sniffed the bodies curiously. They had died so easily. It
was harder to kill a husky dog than them. They were no match at all,
were it not for their arrows and spears and clubs. Thenceforward he
would be unafraid of them except when they bore in their hands their
arrows, spears, and clubs.

Night came on, and a full moon rose high over the trees into the sky,
lighting the land till it lay bathed in ghostly day. And with the
coming of the night, brooding and mourning by the pool, Buck became
alive to a stirring of the new life in the forest other than that which
the Yeehats had made, He stood up, listening and scenting. From far
away drifted a faint, sharp yelp, followed by a chorus of similar sharp
yelps. As the moments passed the yelps grew closer and louder. Again
Buck knew them as things heard in that other world which persisted in
his memory. He walked to the centre of the open space and listened. It
was the call, the many-noted call, sounding more luringly and
compellingly than ever before. And as never before, he was ready to
obey. John Thornton was dead. The last tie was broken. Man and the
claims of man no longer bound him.

Hunting their living meat, as the Yeehats were hunting it, on the
flanks of the migrating moose, the wolf pack had at last crossed over
from the land of streams and timber and invaded Buck’s valley. Into the
clearing where the moonlight streamed, they poured in a silvery flood;
and in the centre of the clearing stood Buck, motionless as a statue,
waiting their coming. They were awed, so still and large he stood, and
a moment’s pause fell, till the boldest one leaped straight for him.
Like a flash Buck struck, breaking the neck. Then he stood, without
movement, as before, the stricken wolf rolling in agony behind him.
Three others tried it in sharp succession; and one after the other they
drew back, streaming blood from slashed throats or shoulders.

This was sufficient to fling the whole pack forward, pell-mell, crowded
together, blocked and confused by its eagerness to pull down the prey.
Buck’s marvellous quickness and agility stood him in good stead.
Pivoting on his hind legs, and snapping and gashing, he was everywhere
at once, presenting a front which was apparently unbroken so swiftly
did he whirl and guard from side to side. But to prevent them from
getting behind him, he was forced back, down past the pool and into the
creek bed, till he brought up against a high gravel bank. He worked
along to a right angle in the bank which the men had made in the course
of mining, and in this angle he came to bay, protected on three sides
and with nothing to do but face the front.

And so well did he face it, that at the end of half an hour the wolves
drew back discomfited. The tongues of all were out and lolling, the
white fangs showing cruelly white in the moonlight. Some were lying
down with heads raised and ears pricked forward; others stood on their
feet, watching him; and still others were lapping water from the pool.
One wolf, long and lean and gray, advanced cautiously, in a friendly
manner, and Buck recognized the wild brother with whom he had run for a
night and a day. He was whining softly, and, as Buck whined, they
touched noses.

Then an old wolf, gaunt and battle-scarred, came forward. Buck writhed
his lips into the preliminary of a snarl, but sniffed noses with him,
Whereupon the old wolf sat down, pointed nose at the moon, and broke
out the long wolf howl. The others sat down and howled. And now the
call came to Buck in unmistakable accents. He, too, sat down and
howled. This over, he came out of his angle and the pack crowded around
him, sniffing in half-friendly, half-savage manner. The leaders lifted
the yelp of the pack and sprang away into the woods. The wolves swung
in behind, yelping in chorus. And Buck ran with them, side by side with
the wild brother, yelping as he ran.


And here may well end the story of Buck. The years were not many when
the Yeehats noted a change in the breed of timber wolves; for some were
seen with splashes of brown on head and muzzle, and with a rift of
white centring down the chest. But more remarkable than this, the
Yeehats tell of a Ghost Dog that runs at the head of the pack. They are
afraid of this Ghost Dog, for it has cunning greater than they,
stealing from their camps in fierce winters, robbing their traps,
slaying their dogs, and defying their bravest hunters.

Nay, the tale grows worse. Hunters there are who fail to return to the
camp, and hunters there have been whom their tribesmen found with
throats slashed cruelly open and with wolf prints about them in the
snow greater than the prints of any wolf. Each fall, when the Yeehats
follow the movement of the moose, there is a certain valley which they
never enter. And women there are who become sad when the word goes over
the fire of how the Evil Spirit came to select that valley for an
abiding-place.

In the summers there is one visitor, however, to that valley, of which
the Yeehats do not know. It is a great, gloriously coated wolf, like,
and yet unlike, all other wolves. He crosses alone from the smiling
timber land and comes down into an open space among the trees. Here a
yellow stream flows from rotted moose-hide sacks and sinks into the
ground, with long grasses growing through it and vegetable mould
overrunning it and hiding its yellow from the sun; and here he muses
for a time, howling once, long and mournfully, ere he departs.

But he is not always alone. When the long winter nights come on and the
wolves follow their meat into the lower valleys, he may be seen running
at the head of the pack through the pale moonlight or glimmering
borealis, leaping gigantic above his fellows, his great throat a-bellow
as he sings a song of the younger world, which is the song of the pack.